Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, my children, now I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the medical sciences. By its completion, by what it contains, and by its explanations and clarifications, in my view, I believe I have fulfilled your love for this treatise, which pertains to the practice that lies with me, namely surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the practice that lies with me is almost entirely deprived in our region and at our time, except that there is a slight trace of its science, and its appearance remains. We have nothing but small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which mislead people into error and hesitation regarding its principles and weaken its strength and the art itself.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I should revive this through the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and explanation and abbreviation; and so that it comes in the forms of cautery tools and other instruments used in the work as indicated by the explanation, and for its preparation, which is a necessary cause.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the reason why a good practitioner is not found in surgery at this time is that the art of medicine is extensive, and one must be well versed in anatomy before being practiced, which Galen described as understanding the functions of the limbs and their forms, and the connection and separation of them; having knowledge of the bones, nerves, and muscles, and their numbers and distribution; and of the pulsating veins and the stationary ones, and the places where they are found.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this reason Hippocrates said that in name it is much, but in practice little, and especially in the art of surgery.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	This we have already said at the beginning of this book; for whoever is not well versed in what we have said about anatomy will inevitably fall into error through which men may die, as I have seen too many of them, for some are formed in this science and get themselves out of that without knowledge and experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a foolish doctor who had incised an abscess on the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed out, causing the woman to die quickly.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who thought he would remove a stone from a man who was suffering from kidney stones, and the stone was large. He came to him and pulled out that stone along with a piece of the bladder, whereupon that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I was called to remove that stone and saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew for certain that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who was being paid by a duke of our land to perform surgery on a black castrated man who had a fracture in his thigh. Due to the doctor's ignorance, he exposed the fracture over the wound with splints and bandages in a strong structure but did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And he untied it according to his desires and then bandaged it again. After some days, he commanded that we loosen the binding; and thus, between loosening and reapplying it, the thigh and foot became abscessed, leading to his ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to attend him, and I prepared to loosen the bandage. Once it was loosened, he found relief from his pain and tranquility.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, once the corruption was confirmed in the member, since it could not be restrained, and it did not cease to spread the corruption throughout the member until the patient was in danger.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another surgeon who lanced a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated after about ten days, until the malignancy worsened greatly under his lord's supervision.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause of which is that the cancerous part is free from melancholic humor; therefore, it does not need to reach all parts of the body, but rather remains in the member that has suffered and hosted it.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, my children, it is necessary for you that the operation be planned in two aspects: one is an operation associated with health, and the other is a procedure involving significant risks.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already stated this in every place in this book where an operation involves both error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to heed this and avoid that, so that the pages do not reproach me for speaking and leading you astray.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And thus take up your weapons with diligence and the protection of God, and treat your patients with skill and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best path by God's grace to lead to health and praiseworthy success, and avoid terrible diseases that are difficult to heal, and remain armed against what causes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and name does not evade you: for it is better to remain in your glory, and more so in this world and ultimately for your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Wound treatment in some monastic surgeries:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat illness badly, for thus bad doctors are not named.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have dedicated this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The division of the book begins, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered concerning the head and its treatments, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of cautery, and of what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, concerning bleeding and punctures, and of cupping, and of plasters, and of extracting arrows and similar objects, fully chaptered and ordered regarding the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, concerning restoration and dislocation, and the treatment of fractures and similar conditions; a chapter ordered regarding the head and its treatments, and of the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Concerning cauterization with fire and with sharp medicine and recalling the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	There begins the treatise of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I shall speak of the quality of the movements of that cautery and of its precautions, and in what condition cautery should be prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the movements of cautery and its precautions is long and extensive, subtle by science, and hidden as a secret; many wise men have spoken about it, and they are often at odds with each other, but for me a little of their discourses suffices to avoid prolongation.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	Therefore, I say that cauteries apply universally to all formations, either material or immaterial, with the exception of two formations which are tail-like and immaterial.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the tail-like and dry formation that is material, it dries out; for some say that cautery is helpful in such cases, while others say the opposite, that cautery is not appropriate for a disease that is due to heat and dryness, since the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is inappropriate to treat a tail-like and dry condition with something that is hot and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And those who say the opposite are wrong, because cautery is beneficial in all tail-like and dry diseases that occur in human bodies. When you compare the condition of the human body and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find that the human body is fragile.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say according to the words of that person, that experience has already shown this to me on several occasions.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But I do not intend that it should be upon this for one who has already been trained and exercised in the chapter of cautery by previous practice, and who has known the diversity of human formations and the disposition of diseases in their seasons, and the causes thereof, and their accidents, and the duration of time.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other formations there is no fear for you, especially in fragile and humid diseases, since all physicians are now in agreement about those, and they do not disagree on the benefit of cautery in such cases.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And you know, children, that the secret of healing through cautery with fire and its effectiveness is that fire is simple, and its action affects only the part being cauterized and does not harm other parts nearby except for minor damage.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	Here is the English translation:
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	May the fire, by its sublimity and goodness of substance, do nothing but superfluify. And it is known to us through experiment and length of service in studying the art about the truth of causes; and by this I excuse myself from the length of speech. And if not that it were read in my book here paused for you secrets hidden with fire, and the quality of operation thereof in the bodies and expulsion thereof by which expels diseases, philosophical discourse demonstrative, which would be sharp in your possessions.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And remember, children, that they who neglect the time in which it is proper to perform cautery lose the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, for the harm caused by accidental time is submerged in the benefit of what is attracted by the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary to relieve pain, strength and inflammation, which cannot endure delay because it is feared that from those might come malice, which is worse than a small injury entering through the wrong timing.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And this does not concern your possessions, or, children, what is valued only by the common people and foolish doctors, is that for the illness which is cured by cautery, it is not remediable at all times, and they delay that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the reason is not just as they think, for cautery is merely a substitute for medicine that alters the complexion and dries the humidity which is the cause of pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But may the fire, however, be used sparingly in medicine due to the speed of its value and the virtue of its operation and the greatness of its power.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that his illness may return at some time according to the condition of the patient and the location of the illness, and its nature, and what has been prepared in his body by the accumulation of superfluities in him, and what has been acquired in him through food and similar causes; but if the illness for which cautery is administered is a subtle one in a member with little superfluity and moisture, such as the cautery of a tooth for pain and similar cases, it is possible that this pain will not return, but this applies to minor cases.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And the common saying is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is said by those who specialize in it, not because those who understand it hold this view, for I believe they consider there to be no cure that benefits more than cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer methods of treatment for certain illnesses, and those remedies are ineffective, and at the end of this cause, cautery is administered, and it proves effective.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And at this point it is said that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which I hold regarding the common misconceptions and excessive practices of foolish physicians.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the excellence of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the location for cautery does not matter, which is not absolutely true, for I have already experienced this and have found that it works well only in certain bodies and not with others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron as they say; but when you perform cautery with fire using gold, it is not clearly defined to you, because the hardness of the gold changes according to the quantity you want by the heat of the fire, and because it prepares itself to receive friction; and if you adjust over it with fire, the gold melts due to the heat, and if you place some sheets in the fire for the craftsman to shape them during that process.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And thus with water is made the cautery of iron which you should apply gently and gradually according to the correctness of the procedure.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery after the chapters, and I have arranged those of the head among the parts, so that I relieve the inquirer asking for what they want.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On cautery for headache due to cold and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery is applied to the cold and moisture that causes an accidental inflammation of the head, and these two causes are also the cause of lethargy and a multitude of rheumatic fluxes called corsica, from the head to the limbs and ears with fluid discharge, and a multitude of sleepiness, toothache, and gout, and generally all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, stroke, and similar conditions in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: first, order the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine that cleanses the head, for three or four nights, according to what you require based on the strength of the patient and their age and habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then place him sitting between two chairs and have him rest his elbows on his knees.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the palm of your hand near the bridge of his nose between his eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But when the temperature of the middle finger has been felt, mark that place with ink, and then apply the olive wood cautery, which is made as follows:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then pause there at the marked spot with the needle, in such a way that it descends, by which the skin may be gradually stretched, and you turn it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then move your hand gently and look at the place, and if you see that some part of the bone is uncovered, as much as the amount of grain in one's palm, now raise your hand, and if not return your hand to that tool or another like it, if it has cooled, until you feel the bone as I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the spot and let it be for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then pause on the inner edge and let it be inside until the burn scab is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the place with a quadruple ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And when it is said that if the wound heals covered, then remove the bandage, for it is better and more helpful.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them say that the wound should be cauterized down to the bone, and the cautery should be held until it adheres to some part of the bone.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then scrape what is adhered to the bone, and then treat it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that with the cautery reach to the deepest part, until it presses strongly on the bone until the bone melts, and this is the way of alpechati (cauterizing slightly).
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they estimate that from that place the vapors of the head emanate.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let the wound be dressed for a long time until it is healed and has become firm.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I have not seen these two types of cauterization on everyone, but only on some people due to a certain way of fearing; and leave that one alone, as far as I am concerned, it is better for the health when it is left alone; because the head is delicate in terms of maintaining its continuity as we have testified with other parts of the body, and even more so when the patient's constitution is cold by nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cauterization is safer and better in my opinion; and from that one, health is more likely to follow.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Second.
Del cauteri del cap.	About cauterization of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head and this is prolonged in the patient, even after using plasters, poultices, compresses, emplastres, ointments, and other remedies, especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that we have described but has not benefited from any of those causes, then consider whether the constitution of the patient's head is strong by nature; and if it is not cold and if there is no great danger, at that time one can use another type of cauterization after that one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize it above the crown of their head with a cautery until the pain is relieved.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the area of pain and expose the amount of bone that we have described, then cauterize it with a cautery at the back of the head in the place called "vas," which is where the temporal artery is located.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And handle it thusly in this manner, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will find great pain from that different from the pain of all other cauteries of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I shall describe this cautery in its place, for it is more delicate to use the cautery which is used for burning the horns of the head and the occiput than that with which one cauterizes the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Chapter Three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On Cauterization of Recent Abscesses.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When severe pain is found in the front part of the head or continuous pain inside the skull, it should be evacuated with medicines that cleanse the head, and other treatments should be administered as I have described for various illnesses; and if this does not benefit, then cauterization can be performed in two ways: either with a sharp, combustible medicine or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But if you perform cauterization with a combustible medicine, take a piece of amber and scrape it, then hold the scraped ends between your fingers.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then cut the area of the pain on the temple with a scalpel until it reaches the proper location just below the skin, so that it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then apply pressure to it with a cloth for a continuous period, and leave it like that for three hours; then remove the cloth and place the amber on it, and leave the wound covered for two or three days; afterwards, place a poultice soaked in butter over it until the area becomes warm.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Let him be treated with those remedies which will heal him.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, use some of the medicines described in the second treatise on burning medicines which I have written.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Here is the cautery method according to this manner: fire for cauterization, of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a nail clamp, for the head of it is in the shape of a nail, with some curvature, and at its middle part there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place it on the location of the pain, and hold your hand—so that the artery below is not adhered to—and move the instrument slightly but quickly.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount that adheres due to the curvature is as much as half of it, raise your hand so that the artery below is not adhered to, so that there is no flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then moisten cotton in salt water and place it on the location, and leave it for three days; and then apply soft bandages, and afterwards treat with internal remedies to heal.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize at the end of the ulna according to cautery methods, and be careful not to cut the artery in this proper non-traditional procedure.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the cauterization of ancient ulcers.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat an ulcer as we have said in the previous treatment and in the divisions of diseases, and if it does not improve, and sometimes due to the disease what has been said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire is insufficient, then you should ignite the ulnar cautery until it becomes white-hot, and place it on the site of the pain along a line that is half the length of your finger or slightly longer; and then raise your hand once and quickly apply pressure so as not to injure the artery and reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, you must guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which is necessary for chewing, and ensure that the tendon is not adhered and the nerves that control it are intact, so that spasm does not occur.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the care and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is being tied off, because there is danger in doing so, especially for one who does not know what they are doing and is not careful and experienced; and leave the operation at that point at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And here I will come to the recollection of the management of blood flow from an artery according to the usual method, in its place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this illness does not respond to these cauteries and the patient's condition is tolerable, cauterize in the appropriate place of the head as we have recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you do, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on the rupture of an artery with a cautery having two edges, and this is better cautery and more effective.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cautery for ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear due to itching and it is treated with laxative causes and with the other treatment that I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain is not relieved, now apply the cautery, and this is the one called puncta, whose form is as follows:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And bring the puncta close to the heat source, and move it around the entire ear as a wheel turns, or in the vicinity of each part if the pain is in that specific area.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Lengthen the cautery of the piercing of the ear little by little until you have marked the place with it.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery reaches those points throughout the ear, and wherever it does, then take care of the places inside until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cautery of the turture (Note: It seems there might be an error or archaic spelling in the original text. The word "turtura" could refer to a specific medical term or condition from medieval times, possibly related to ear treatments or ailments.) 
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The one for which treatment and cautery are not appropriate is only of the types that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery for the type that arises from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that type of illness with jars and capipurgi and gargle remedies, and your treatment does not comfort the patient, then it is necessary to cauterize the illness with three applications: the first at the root of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of both lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cautery at the opposite part of the affected area, for softening occurs only in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cautery is that you cauterize there with the cautery on the right side of the extremity of the most prominent ear, and then a little above the horn of the head, and at another temple, the length of which should be according to the length of your thumb, and then pause your hand with the cautery until half the quantity of the root is burnt.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a type of knife, the form of which is shown below.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, even more subtle is that which you see only slightly; and it is necessary to use a knife instead of excessive coarseness, just a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And subsequently treat the area with the liquid that was previously prepared until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of the cautery for ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said and do not cause fever in the patient, then cauterize it with four cauteries: on top of all the joints of their head; and one cauterization at the middle part of the head, as we have said; and one cauterization on the nape of the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cauterization is done as mentioned above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and this is better later; and then proceed with treatment as appropriate.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of cauterization for forgetfulness done with flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Give the patient large doses at the beginning and pills made from honey for purification.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then shave the patient's head completely and place on the nape of their neck the plaster described in the chapter on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And place it several times, for that is the method of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to the order of the method which I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And thus if he heals well from that; but if not, then perform three cauteries on the rear part of their head, which should descend from the highest part of the head to the part nearest the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place the thickness of a finger between each cauterization, and then proceed to treat the cauterizations as appropriate.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you wish to apply it where there is little tolerance for pain, then now make the cautery in the middle part; and if you want a stronger application, now cauterize that above the two horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Proceed with its care until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form given above.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cautery for parasites and the softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Proceed with the cleansing of the head as we have mentioned and using the methods described; then shave the head of the patient, and afterwards cauterize it in the middle part of the head, and over all the parts of the head, and over the rear part of it, and apply three cauteries along the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the illness of softening the body to use that and the patient can tolerate it only moderately and the illness is severe, then now cauterize it with four cauteries along the vertebrae of the back, and finally apply a cautery inside so that it extends from the shoulder blade area, and increase the heat gradually.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then proceed with its care until it is healed, and this cautery should be olive-shaped.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cautery for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	An epileptic is not cauterized except when the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, you should cleanse the brain at the beginning with decoctions and the other treatments we have described in the section when the patient is robust and can tolerate the exception of medications.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the medicines, then administer gargles and powder mixtures which are purified, before that for several days, with purification of the foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with one cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery at the occiput of him, and on each side of the head he should cauterize.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize that with the cauteries which I have mentioned, having paralysis and relaxation of the body over the cervical vertebrae and the thoracic vertebrae.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let it be an olive-cautery as was described previously.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then use a gentle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On Cauterization for Melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and thick phlegm, then cauterize that with the cauteries which we have mentioned while inducing paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is an excess inclining towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink what purifies his brain according to what was mentioned previously in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then apply a well-made tortora around the circle, and subsequently place it in the middle part of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	Let the wound be sixty days old, and let it be treated from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a liniment; and it is more suitable to use the grease of sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that over the fire in a timely and measured way, which the patient can tolerate when it is applied.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place it in the proper location on the head in a circle, and allow it to be rubbed in.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this once a week for the wound, and follow another regimen to promote healing; or if you prefer, cauterize it with small points as needed, but use your hand with a cautery properly arranged: this is a special type of cautery that moistens the brain with equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then apply that powder mixed in grease or goose fat.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cautery of water descending in the belly.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is clear to you the beginning of water in the belly by the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something that cleanses the head, and protect it from all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And have him sweat in baths for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize it with a cautery in the proper place of the head; and then cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if the beginning of water descending is in two bellies, or on one side if the water begins to descend in one belly.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut away all the veins and arteries that you find attached to the bone; and place the cautery at a distance equal to the width of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be careful of bleeding when it is cauterized; and if you see any bleeding, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And you will need wisdom in the extraction of arteries and their ligation, as well as caution regarding bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And in some cases, it is cauterized at the neck between two bones with two cauteries applied subsequently.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the Cauterization of Old Abscesses.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When old abscesses of the eyes occur frequently and through the veins and arteries that are in a visible location on the head, and it is confirmed that this is due to cold phlegmatic superfluities, then cauterize that area with the cautery we have described in the chapter on how water begins to flow into the eyes. Apply one cautery at an appropriate location on the head and two cauteries between the temples of the neck, and two cauteries between two bones of the neck.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need to add something, then cauterize that area across the entire socket of the eye above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the Cauterization of Nasal Odors.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that person with what we have mentioned in the division and they do not benefit from your treatment, then prepare and give the patient cochineal to drink for three nights; afterwards, shave their head, and cauterize them with a medium-sized cautery using an olive-shaped cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And so cauterize that part with a cautery in the shape of a trefoil, using two cauteries above the two eyebrows, leaving the hair slightly exposed.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful of the archery so that you do not injure it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the shape of the trefoil cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On Cauterization for Softening the Eyelids of the Eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery in the shape of this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do so, cauterize that area above the two eyebrows slightly with two cauteries throughout, and let them extend towards the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather let it adhere to one-third of the eyelid.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On Cauterization of the Eyelid When the Hairs Turn Inside and Scratch the Eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eyelid turn inward and scratch the eye, cauterization should be done in two ways: either by performing it or using a burning medication.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you use cauterization with fire, instruct the patient beforehand to cut their hairs as those of people in the world are cut, so that they are extended and even; and if they scratch from their origin, then bandage the eyes so that it does not happen again until the hairs grow back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Therefore, when the wound is new and inflamed, place the tip of a lancet on the head of the injury in its proper position, and then mark around the eyelids with it, making a sign like the shape of a willow leaf, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hair.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then place a probe deeply in the eye socket or in the mucus of the eyelid.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then apply the cautery, which has this shape.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize over the figure you have marked, little by little, in small strokes, until the surface of the wound, which is like a myrtle leaf, is burned properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of health in this work is that you see the eyelid already contracted and the hair raised around the perforation of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and lay it still for three days, and then place the probe around the border until the scar is eradicated.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for it with medication until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if any cause returns the hair to its original state and the eyelid is softened, then perform the cautery again on that area just as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hair remains in the eyelid downward, then cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural place and is healed so that the hair does not enter the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with a combustible medicine is one that you command the patient to pull out the hair until it grows long and healed, and then make the shape of a myrtle leaf from paper or cloth.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Take soap that is known and living oil in ounce i, or what water you have, and mix those causes well, and do it with speed so that it does not become chilled; then spread that over the sheet which is made like the shape of a myrtle leaf, and put one side on both; and place underneath the poultice completely wrapped in white cloth, and the head of the patient should be toward you.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the hand on the medicine and press it a little so that the patient feels the burning of the medicine, for there is a burning in it like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when the burning pain persists, then remove the medicine and apply it with your hand; when the burning stops, then remove the medicine and wash the area with water; now check if the eyelid is already lifted as it has been washed, you should then use constriction by fire or incision, for now it is good; but if not, return to applying that of the medicine on the place where you have not applied the medicine and do not let it darken until your operation is equalized and the area is constricted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Then place on it around the border until the edge of the adjustment is eradicated, and then cure that with anointing or another method until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to guard with diligent vigilance that no dust of the medicine falls on the wound, and if the eyelid after some days becomes softened and any cause of hair growth in the wound, then repeat your medicine on the place where the eyelid has become softened, and properly as you did at the beginning, and then around it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the form of the myrtle leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you should know that the leaves of men are diverse in magnitude and smallness, and therefore according to this your contraction is made.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And the way to rectitude will not be hidden from one who studies in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On cauterization of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not confer with your treatment, then when you cauterize it according to this method: instruct the patient to place his head between your knees, and let someone assist by holding the patient's head steady between your hands in such a way that it is neither too tight nor agitated.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place a cotton pad soaked in egg white or in a paste of flour over his eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then light the cautery, which has this form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is made of copper, as in the shape of a reed or an eagle's feather, with one end being the cautery.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it can be inserted into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to be as thin as a thread.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But the one that is curved is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	If you approach the treatment of the fistula when it is swollen, and then drain the pus and dry up that area.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not swollen, then open that area and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then proceed with cautery using one that is well-heated, and hold it close but not too much so as to avoid burning your hand or disturbing the patient, and then place the cautery on the flesh around the area and cauterize it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of your cautery you penetrate to the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice if necessary; and leave it like that for three days, and then proceed by placing a poultice around the area and apply a drying agent until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if after those days it has not healed, then proceed by applying sharp and corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed, and act according to what is appropriate in that case.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of cautery for a fistula which some earlier practitioners described: approach the location of the fistula and open it, then place in that fissure a thin piece of lead, about one ounce in quantity; hold your hand close but carefully so that the patient does not move, lest the molten lead reach the flesh; and ensure that you apply to the wound an egg white or water poultice, because the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed as we have described with the cautery and treatment, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer nasal irrigation and reduce the fistula to its proper place in the nose.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter Eighteen.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On cauterizing the wound of the anus.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Often such fissures occur in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those fissures with the methods we have mentioned and your treatment is not effective, then use fire to cauterize it slightly with a small knife in the following manner:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let the heat of the cautery be according to the subtlety of the tissue.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Apply the heated tip carefully to those fissures until the cautery reaches the edge of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter Nineteen.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On cauterizing a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess occurs at the uvula or on the palate or in the gums around the teeth, and it bursts, and then becomes inflamed, and is left untreated, it forms a fistula. If you treat this and your treatment does not succeed, it is necessary for you to cauterize with fire according to the size of the fistula, and place the heated cautery in the tract of the fistula, using your hand until the very hot part reaches the edges of it; do this once or twice. Then treat it as we have said for its cure until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the tissue is divided and heals, that is good; but if not, it is necessary to expose the site and remove the corrupted bone as will be described in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On cauterization of the teeth and softening of the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are diseased, apply these medicines and do not confereys; then place the tip of the malady in its site, and immediately ignite the cauterizing agent which will be appropriate for this purpose, so that you place the cautery quickly on the tooth, but only slightly enter it so that the pain from the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then remove your hand, and immediately repeat the cauterization several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then have the patient rinse their mouth with salt water and hold it for one hour, and afterwards spit it out, for the diseased tooth is now arrested and the softened gum has become firm and the corrupted moisture has been dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On cauterization of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to coldness, or there is decay or worm damage, and no relief is obtained with medicine, then the cauterization should be done in two ways: either with a cow's horn or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterization with a horn is done by taking a cow's horn and boiling it in oil. Then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of the horn, and immediately immerse the horn in the hot oil, then quickly place it on the painful tooth to rub it.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	From there insert candles around so that the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you take wool or cloth in the boiling mixture mentioned above and place it on the aching tooth, and put hot iron on top until the heat reaches the pain area of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, when using cautery with fire, you should wait for the moment of lesser intensity or use iron, and place it in the center of some thickness so that the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then heat the cautery to the desired form and place it on the tooth, moving your hand until the cautery is applied; do this for several days until the pain subsides either on that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary that the patient rinse their mouth with good liquid due to the pressure of that cautery and hold it for an hour, then spit it out; this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize as much as you wish, according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the tube:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the Cauterization of Hemorrhoids.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hemorrhoids are caused by phlegm and other humors that do not respond to digestion through medication and you wish to digest them lightly, then heat the cautery according to this form, which has two open ends so that the smoke can escape; hold one end of the cautery and place the heated part on the abscess once, or again if necessary, until it reaches the base of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, postpone the use of cauterization according to the size of the abscess, and then wait three days and pause on top of it until what the fire has burned becomes softened.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of that which is wounded and bandage it with cloths until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the cannula or cauterization for this purpose is appropriate.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On Cauterization of Hoarseness of Voice and Constriction of Throat.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the venous humidity comes over the channel of the lung, and especially when this is due to coldness of temperament, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and subsequently cauterize that part below the root of the navel.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful that you do not apply the cautery to the navel, nor burn more than a little of the skin.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that part with another cautery below the joint of the neck at the last vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And let the cautery be shaped like a nail according to the previous method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of that which is wounded as previously described until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On Cauterization of Lung Disease and Cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are due to cold humidity and the patient does not have fever or consumption but has an old illness, then cauterize that area with two cauteries above the collarbone in the lower parts on both sides; and with another cautery at the middle part of the chest between the two nipples; and let the cauteries be shaped like nails according to the previous method.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you want, let your cautery be pointed with the cautery that is called puncta, the shape of which precedes in the piercing of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let the points be inside the cuts for those; and then cure that with what has been prepared so that it may heal.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And there let the cautery have three slopes, for the cautery is for that: in one instance you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cautery of the titillium which is the head of the helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and does not return to its place because of its displacement until it reaches what it usually returns to, and then through a slight movement it becomes displaced again as we have testified, at that time you should first reduce the dislocation, and then lay the patient on their back or on their side; and then lift the part inside the citillium towards the upper parts with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated towards the inner parts.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then use the cautery having two tips; and this is the form of it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the part so that it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cautery will come out with four tips after the cautery.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And do this carefully according to the amount needed; and this is the form of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And for some wounds it is appropriate according to this count and because there are cauteries .viii.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then pause over the cauteries porous and distant from salt, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and let the limb not be moved for some time until it is healed.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is to the upper parts and this is done, then cauterize over the muscle near the cautery nail or with pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the moisture is dispersed and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On Cauterization of the Stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is bleeding in the stomach, mix and stir the moisture until it becomes part of its composition and so multiply its quantities. And if you continue the methods of treatment and do not confirm it, then have the patient lie on their back, extend their arms and legs, and then cauterize with three cauteries: place one cauteri below the feet by the length of a finger from a nail cauteri, and two cauteries below each side of the first cauteri so that they form a triangular pattern; and space them apart so that they do not touch and cause burning.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cauterization is equal to two-thirds the thickness of the bone.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the figure of the cauteri be according to this form without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this shall be a cautery according to the shape of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let it be cauterized the stomach puncturing for him who is frightened by this cautery: and that you feel over the stomach with a point according to the amount you wish to try, and then cauterize that which was pricked with the cautery; and then cure that with the treatment mentioned before until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the Cautionary Use of Cautery for Inflammation of the Kidney.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain arises in the kidney due to coldness or moisture or excessive windiness causing deviation from its normal composition through excessive excretion, and it is cured with what we have mentioned without compression, then the patient should be positioned on their back, and you should feel with your hand three cauteries according to this form and quantity placed over the kidneys below the hypochondria, as would be appropriate for a person lying down.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the length of each cautery be according to the length of the right arm.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press your hand on the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of water adhering is half the length of a cubit, and it should not be more closely adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, having laid out their things, and raise their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to perform these cauteries with a cautery knife when you possess subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And guard yourself that you do not proceed too quickly in the cauterization, and let the cautery be applied to the entire length of the wound so that it adheres to the whole body and reaches into the pouches, for here the wound is delicate; and understand this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the incision of an abscess of the testicle with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When you find an inflammation or abscess in the testicle and wish to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the testicle or in the tunica, then if it is in the flesh of the testicle, the patient will experience a heavy pain and acute discomfort.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunica of the testicle, the pain will be intense and often exhausts the efforts of the physician to treat it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, have the patient lie on his back; and then feel the location of the abscess by touching it; and then apply the cautery which resembles a reed, the form of which was described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that cautery until the entire wound is consumed, until it reaches the center, until it becomes healthy.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area as you would for other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not appropriate to use this form of cautery except by one whose study in the art of medicine is extensive and who has recognized many diseases; but even after experimenting a few times with this procedure, he should be cautious and leave it to those more experienced, which is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On Cauterization of Ulcers.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Take the cauterizing materials from the roots of artemisia for ulcers according to this method. And it is that you take a root of artemisia, long and dry, one piece which can be found, and let it be as thick as your finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse it in oil and roast it over the fire. Then cauterize with one cautery at that place which is between the clavicle and the neck; and two small cauteries below it, slightly inclined towards the part that is below the beard, and two cauteries inclined between the fifth rib and the back, slightly inclined to the rear parts; and another cautery in the middle of the feet; and one above the stomach; and three cauteries at the rear parts; and one cautery in the place which is between the two shoulders, and two cauteries on either side of the feet below the cautery that is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And it is not necessary to make a cut at the cautery sites, but rather let them be evident on the surface of the skin.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And some ancient authors say that sometimes in men who use a cautery of iron resembling a ray and heat it, they place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess so that it may be drained, as we have said regarding the abscess of the testicle.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this puncturing with the cautery there is no fear, for it happens quickly and such an accident occurs at the place where there is no healing.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cautery of the melesa.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the disease of the melesa as we have said about the treatment in the division and do not confer with your treatment, now you should cauterize according to three ways, all of which are appropriate. One of these is that you make three or four lines of cautery depending on the length of the melesa, following the shape of the cauteries for the fetus, the figure of which has been described previously.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And there should be a space between each cautery as wide as the thickness of one finger or a little more, and the method of the cautery should be the same method we have described for the cauteries of the fetus.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not compress your hand with the cautery; and let the disease be above its two sides.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another method of cauterizing, which is to ignite the cauteries vertically, which we have described in the chapter on the dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the shoulder, which is on the right side of the melesa where the disease spreads from the left side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation should be such that when you elevate the shoulder according to the length of the body, the cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert both sides, ignite it immediately, at the place where it penetrates the shoulder on the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries are completed.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three openings.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And if the cautery becomes filled with pus and it is necessary to remove it after too many days, for it may be more convenient than the other causes previously mentioned in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On Cauterization of Hydrops.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cautery should not be applied to hydrops except in a specific proper manner.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the hydrops using the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not conform to your treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, another on the liver, another on the kidney, two between the vertebrae of the back, one on the right foot, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then let the cautery ooze so that it can drain for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the harmful substances from the treatment near the cautery with water, but rather let them be absorbed into the body for healing purposes.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be nail-shaped as described above, and the one with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to its previous description.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter xxxii.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On cautery for pus and other matters.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When pus is apostematous in hydropic areas and the area is filled with thin water (edema), it is necessary to cauterize the pus over the part that is between the ring finger and the middle finger, and raise your hand holding the cautery without twisting it; then raise your hand, but do not return it completely, because the thin water will be expelled.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery should be performed in this manner: Then apply two cauterizations to each of the areas, and at each area, perform a cautery with the tip of the cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	The cautery should be performed according to the length of the area: place one below and the other at the middle part of the area; and on each area, perform two cauterizations.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the affected area untreated for some time until some water (fluid) is expelled from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then treat according to those causes that we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter xxxiii.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On cautery for swellings of the abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When swellings of the abdomen are due to irritation and humidity that debilitate the organs, particularly the digestive and retentive functions located in the stomach and intestines, it is treated according to methods of treatment without confinement, and sometimes the patient suffers from a cautery intended to expel harmful properties. At such times, cauterize it with a large cautery over the center of the abdomen as previously described for stomach cauterization, using the circular cautery and four subtle cauteries around the navel, along with a subtle clavilh cautery; or use one larger cautery above the pubis, or two smaller ones.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you remove the excessive humors and the pain tolerates water, then cauterize that over the navel and over the abdomen, and gently place two cauteries on the stomach and near the groin, for this is a perfect cure from which you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter xxxiv.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the Cauterization of Ancient Hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When dealing with the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or one caused by thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they are cured by the water we have mentioned in the division but do not respond to the usual cure, then cauterize them with three cauteries below the spine near the two small ones shaped like a triangle, and place two of these above the navel.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you suspect that the stomach of the patient is irritated and the food is not being digested, and his face appears inflamed, then cauterize that over the stomach with a large cauterization as previously described; and place one cauterization on the liver, and another cauterization on the spleen with a nail-shaped cautery, and allow the patient to rest for some time until he is cured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter xxxv.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the Cauterization of Atheyl Near Its Abscess.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you incise an abscessed atheyl, then apply the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	After incising that abscessed atheyl, apply heat to it and ensure that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	In this one or two times, because if the bleeding continues, immediately cauterize each of them as we have recounted, and then treat those with what applies to their medicines until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery over the wound, it is better for healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are made in the nature behind in the parts there.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, let it be healed with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Then when someone has a fistula in the nature behind, and it is old, with rotten pus and moisture, what is most worthy to do is to probe that with a fine instrument, and then determine the depth of it with the previously mentioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then heat the cautery so that it is like a red-hot needle.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then place the heated cautery into this fistula according to the amount in which the probe entered.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat with the cautery until those corrupted substances are consumed completely in one instance or two or three, according to the amount of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful not to burn the nerve and vein; or if the fistula goes into the body of the bladder or into the intestine, then be cautious in all those places; and do this only when the fistula is in a fleshy location where you think it does not penetrate further.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, take care of the place inside so that it may be healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed off, and all matter has been removed from it, and remains this way for a long time, then you will know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matter does not come from the bone, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the area of the corrupted bone, or comes from those causes about which there will be mention later.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the Cauterization of Wounds.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When pain in the wounds arises from rubbing or excessive inflammation, and because of this the patient's condition is worsened, then it is appropriate to cauterize that area with a cautery on each wound using a nail-like instrument about which there will be mention later.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And wait a little while before cauterizing again, so that there will be three intervals between the cauterizations, and thus they will be more beneficial.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the Cauterization of the Bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When debility and softness occur in the bladder due to friction and excessive moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that area slightly above the bladder where the hair of the pubis begins, and cauterize once on the right side and once on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of sweat; and cauterize that area once in the lowest part of both sides, or twice if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let it be cauterized with a clamp as is prescribed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On Cauterization of the Eyelid.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is blood and humidity in the eyelid, and because of this intercourse is prohibited, and their menses are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and pain occurs due to their presence; therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the area with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said regarding the cauterization of the bladder; and two cauteries should be applied near the affected spot, or two cauteries may be used, and let it be cauterized with a clamp as has been described.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On Cauterization of the Dislocation of the Joint.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When there is moisture and swelling around the joint, and it occurs due to causes that lead to displacement from its proper location, and the sign of this is that the part extends beyond the other when they are compared.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is treated where it hurts.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then you should cauterize the affected area near the joint with two circular cauteries after having marked their positions around the part as it is described, so that the part falls in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let the form of the cautery be as prescribed in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries using a large olive-shaped cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the spicitude of the entire wound; and then treat that part which needs healing.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLI.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the joint area and its cause is friction and humidity, treat it with the methods we have mentioned and do not confine it, for this is outdated. Now you should relieve the patient of thick humors using fetid pills or artificial pills or similar remedies; then cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either cauterize with combustible medicines, or cauterize with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It should be done according to two known methods, one of which is that you cauterize that area over the joint using three triangular cauteries as shown in this form; and ensure proper depth with them.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cauterization should be the width of the thickness of a finger, and the cauterizations should be olive or grape in shape.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	But at other times, the cauterizations should be on the middle part above the joint so that there are four cauterizations.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize using a circular method that precedes the form used in the cauterization of a dislocated joint, ensuring that the circle is continuous and burns the entire wound's surface.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cauterization when pain is localized at the joint and does not spread to the surrounding area.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	If it is spread inside the joint, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the joint above the place where you will direct the pain which is the ache; and with one cauterization on the knuckle for four days a little away from the wild area.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery cuts through, let its depth be according to the amount of spicitude of the tendon.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the pain you direct is spread in the area near the soles of the feet, then cauterize there where you are directing it with three points or four or more if you need it.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the pain you direct is below the elbow near the joint, then cauterize there with one cutting cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cauterizations that you do not end the cautery until you burn a nerve or large artery, and thereby cause harm to your patient maliciously or by mistake.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen one and another of those who cauterized on the knuckle and ended the cauterization, and the bed of fire spread inside until the tumor reached the foot, and the fire penetrated and corrupted the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And as a result of this severe abdominal inflammation, and after that death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts simultaneously, cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise ones say about the cauterization of each cautery of which this is the method: make it resemble a circle of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and place it above the skin according to the thickness of a date bone or slightly more.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And in that circle make another third one; and let the space which is between them be equal to the width of a finger; and let those circles be divided into two parts; and let the length of those bands be one or two fingers, and attach those edges of iron decently prepared around the circles; and this is the form of it.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then it should be ignited in the fire so that it glows and sparks, and then it should be placed over the part of the wound, with the malady placed upon its surface.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And thus cauterize that area three times in one session.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then let it rest for three days; then apply a bandage to that area and let the wound be covered for more than ten days; and then treat that area with medicines until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Al-Bucasis says: O children, we have used this type of cautery rarely due to the fear of its consequences, and because few have found those who are knowledgeable about it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But for the very cauteries that one has endured, and find the place where they were applied.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But cauteries with medicines adhering should be made with two circles having a perforated template in which the hole of the iron door should fit. The length of the edges should be one or two nuts or similar to those.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between each one is equal to the thickness of a finger; and let them be divided below and above, and let them fit within each other according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then apply a poultice to the exit of the urine, and let the patient sit over it, and place your hand on the exit of the urine; and then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and make the quality of that water little by little hotter until for one hour’s quantity, and let the patient endure the biting and irritation — as if that torment were like a burning bite — until the biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand with the instrument and remove the hot water from all of the urine to lukewarm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let him rest for three days and apply a dressing until the blackness of the irritation is gone, and let him rest for some more days, and it will heal from infection; this is the final remedy.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with medicines until he is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends to the chest or the ribs, treat it in the same way as was done for the urine, similarly.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and another substance not extinguished from both parts, and stir them and place in a new jar whose lower part is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into the process.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place below the bottom of the jar another inverted jar, and pour over that alkali and living substance lukewarm water in which it rises by one finger, and when you press them with your hand for good compression, and let the jar from which the sharp water drains out through the lower part into the inverted jar.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then adjust all that water, and add it to another living cause and another renewed alkali, because at that time it will have great strength of sharpness, which is administered in many medical operations and in cauterization of the other members, because this operation does with fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And so with some medicines with which it is cauterized widely, such as vinegar and honey mixed with natron and a cause with soap, in such a way that they are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gaul relates of a man from the ancients the operation and the cure with which he was cured of pain in the sciatic nerve and vein, and magnifies much how good it is for that, and says that there is no need for any other treatment, and because he was healed once as mentioned, because lightly that intervention in bath and vinegar sufficed.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be taken from a certain green herb, and if the green is not available, fresh figs should be used; and much should be crushed with a little salt and placed on the water where the pain is, or on the hip, or on the thigh, and bandaged.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount that the patient estimates as comfortable.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put that person in a bath, and when their body is warmed, move them to dry land, for the pain ceases and they are healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cauterization with these medicines except after the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But Galen says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with a goat's horn, it benefits the patient greatly; and let the cauterization be done in this way: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and on the bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Take a split piece of dry goat horn and fill it with something to make charcoal inside until it is charred; then place it on the wool and spread it out until it is stretched.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then continue doing this, and do not stop until the sensation of the bite reaches the joint and the pain subsides.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cauterization is called cow cauterization.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On Cauterization for Pain in the Joints.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	In some cases, pain in the joints is caused by various reasons, such as from dislocation or impact or excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to these, through the infusion of moist and irritating matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterization is not used for any other condition but this specific one, which is caused by the infusion of irritating matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, after evacuating the noxious substance with small pills and similar remedies, apply them to the joint where the pain is located in three rows according to its width. Place at least five cauterizations or more in each row, depending on the tolerance of the patient and the potency of the remedy.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let the cauterization be done with pointed cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a central nail-shaped cauterization in this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cauterization at the beginning of jaundice.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Most often this disease affects small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that it occurs on their digestive system, with the yellowness and elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you observe at the last vertebra of the back and in those that are beginning to rise above the others.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a cautery that is circular according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that you take the cautery over the entire part of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two lines or three away from it.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close together.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And immediately treat the area so that it heals as we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But be careful that cauterization is not administered in jaundice that is caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pains are caused by humors rubbing against each other as they flow through the body, then when pains occur in the feet, it is common for doctors to refer to this as gout properly.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore, since gout caused by rubbing is treated with a specific method and the pains are not relieved by other means, then cauterization should be applied.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And so you cauterize that part of the evacuation area in the vicinity of the joint at the end with the cautery.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And may you cauterize the olive-shaped one of which this is the form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make a puncture on the shin, then perform a point cauterization.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains rise into the joints or other junctions, and this happens frequently, then cauterize each joint with three cauterizations or four from all sides with this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if indeed you need these cauteries, then cauterize and do not press too hard with your hand before the cautery, but only around the specific area of the wound.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains rise into the joint and the second area, then administer the cauteries as we have said in their respective chapters.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the muscles and it is called a cramp, then puncture around the affected area as it revolves, puncturing those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the aforementioned areas, then puncture around the affected area on each knot and on the palm of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains rise near any of the joints in the spine or muscles, then cauterize them from all sides with the assistants.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the malady without proper regimen and reception of medicines, for if good regimen is followed and phlegm is evacuated with this cautery, it will be healed, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On cauterizing wounds.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When you find a rupture in the groin and intestines coming out through the wound, and this begins to happen nearby, then you should order the patient to stop eating for a day and to use laxatives so that the protrusion returns to the abdomen.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And have the patient lie down on their back immediately, and order them to keep their belly in so that it is forced inward or the wound does not appear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return to explain to the patient and show them how to identify the rupture near the pubic bone, marking the extremity of which appears similar to half a circle at the lower parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then prepare the cautery, which has this form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	so that it is round and emits sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then reduce the intestine or wound to its normal position, and then place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not slip out again.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And you have already placed pillows between the patient's body parts and let them lie on one pillow, with other pillows under their thighs, so that they remain lying down.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery over that mark with your hand on top of the cautery, and do so until you feel the pubic bone in the middle; repeat this several times if you did not succeed on the first attempt to locate it.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe wisely the condition of the bowel when you are about to cauterize it, that you do not burn that bowel so that death or other great harm does not come upon the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And be aware that when you use the cautery, do not touch the bone, do not proceed with your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be gentle according to their age and size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And take care of the place where you cauterized for three days, bandaging it so that the burn scar heals.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of it with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the place is sealed and the wound healed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is necessary to restrict the patient's diet according to the length of the healing time for which the belly is inflamed, and that the bowel does not protrude due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when you want to remove it after about forty days, administer it carefully and properly, and keep that in place for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let them be restricted from work and overeating food and drink, and from speaking loudly, for when they follow this regimen of complete healing, they will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will describe the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if you do not want them to spread, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and let this be about one-third of its length; and afterward treat it as we have said, and it will heal.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some early writers said that rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery of this form, as it is marked with the template:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and a line is drawn for the latitude in the flanks above the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand with a nail-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is quicker and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the Cauterization of Dislocations.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain occurs in some member due to falling or striking and persists for a long time without being relieved by medicine, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery for each member should be according to its size and smallness, its strength and weakness, and the location of the dislocation and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If it heals with the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery. For it is customary for such pains to be punctured in the member closest to where the pain is, so you must achieve this with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the Cauterization of Leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some cases of leprosy are helped greatly by cauterization, but rarely when the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so when you wish to cauterize that person, consider whether the leprosy is commencing and can be cured by what we have said in the division, and if you fear for the patient that the corruption will encompass the whole body and its entire composition, then cauterize it on the head with five cauteries: one at the middle part of the head, and another further down, near the forehead; two on the temples; and one at the back, above the neck or nape.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And last of all your cautery must be applied a little inside where it presses upon the bone and makes a slight impression, so that the scales may thereby be displaced, whereby the emission of gross vapors is facilitated; and cauterize over the mucus as needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy has already spread over the body and is manifestly apparent, then you should cauterize in those places with those cauteries which we have mentioned at the beginning; and one cautery on the tip of the nose, two cauteries on each cheek, two on each vertebra of the neck, six on the vertebrae of the back, a large one near the buttocks, another on the buttock itself, two on each thigh, one on each leg, two on each instep and one on each heel; and cauterize that over all the joints of his arms and feet, and on each sole of his feet, and on the creases of their hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves which lie above the heel so that you do not burn them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And in some cases it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the little finger and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more closely you apply the cauteries, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as others do, because his body is already numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is appropriate that the cauteries be large or small according to the members and joints as required by the nature of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation:
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On cauterizing for numbness.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a limb is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not get better, then you should cauterize that numb limb with cautery according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let the heat of the cautery enter the depth of the skin a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with an ointment so that it may be healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes numbness is cauterized not only in the affected area but also on the bones and vertebrae of the back and on the points where the nerves that control that limb originate, and the numbness is thus alleviated.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not proceed with this unless you are skilled in the anatomy of the limb and the emergence of nerves throughout the moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On cauterizing for ulcers that are necrotic.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When an old ulcer does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you should cauterize over it with a cautery for a short time according to the quantity and specificity of the skin depth until the whiteness and color of it change, and its color is altered.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with flour of eggs and lentils mixed with rose oil and arnica leaves, and the blood of a pigeon or swallow, each in part and all mixed together, and then apply it on a cloth and place it over the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter I.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On cauterizing ulcers.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize that part with a cauterizing agent in a circular manner around it as it appears.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise ones say that it should be cauterized with the last cauterization in the middle part; but to me this has not been seen, for I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have already seen this happen in some cases.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is more prudent to cauterize it around the part in a circular manner as we have said, or rather use cautery around it.
Capitol .li.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When hemorrhoids are delayed in maturing due to excess moisture in that area, or because of the patient's condition, such as being old and debilitated with little blood, or simply due to time, and you want to hasten their maturation; then cauterize around them with small punctures using a cautery. After this, they will mature more quickly.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to perforate it with the cautery, then take the cautery which has this shape and place it in the middle part of the hemorrhoid until it penetrates the tissue.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is applied to that area further back, so that the arm remains undisturbed; then care for it until it heals.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LII.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On Cauterization with Corrosives.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	A corrosive is a wandering corruption in the limb, which corrodes just as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, when you see the corrosive in a place where it can withstand cautery with fire, then you ignite and apply small points of cautery, and larger ones as is appropriate in the place where the corrosion is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And proceed to cauterize it thoroughly from all sides until you eradicate the entire corrosion and leave no cause for its recurrence.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then wash it for three days, and apply dressings over the cauterized areas with oil mixed in until all the scars are eradicated and all the corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat it with substances that promote flesh growth.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days you see that healthy flesh is growing where there is no corruption, it is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains in the corrupted areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And some corrosives are treated with sharp medicines, for those are a means instead of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But cautery with fire is more rapid in bringing about healing.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already mentioned the treatment of it with sharp medicines in the division, and therefore use that when you find it necessary.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On cauterization of wounds and other similar conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Most times, when treating wounds in the lower part of the thigh known as "clau," which is a serious condition involving thick and deep tissue damage, one should proceed with cautery using two methods: fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	The fire cautery is performed by heating the cautery instrument, which should resemble a circular shape similar to a wheel, made of iron in accordance with the size of the wound. It should have fine edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place the heated instrument on the wound, and immediately rotate your hand with the cautery around the perimeter of the wound until the cautery reaches the depth of the wound.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let it be for three days until it begins to scab over.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a plaster made of crushed wild mallow mixed with salt to it, and let the plaster remain on it for one night, for this will help remove it from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and often happens on the surface of the body, especially in the thighs and buttocks, then you should administer hot water cautery to them. This is done by taking a small tube made of iron or copper or resembling a wheel, and place it on the wound; then pour a small amount of hot water into the tube and hold it tightly while rotating it thoroughly with compression from your hand, applying the edge of the tube to the root of the wound; as the hot water flows through, wait for about an hour for the effect of the water's heat on the wound, and then remove it, for the wound along with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus place them one close to the other until you come above all those which by nature are in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And apply treatment to those abscesses after the roots of the nails have been removed with the instruments which cause flesh to grow.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the cautery for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you find that someone has a tremor due to friction in the nerves or from fever causing friction, or for some other similar cause, it is then necessary for you to cauterize that area with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra one cauterization; and at the feet of the patient, as well as over the stomach, use an olive-shaped cauterization.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of the patient subsides and hastens the recovery from the illness caused by friction.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LIV.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cautery for accidental injuries to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body there appear accidental swellings and pus-filled wounds that are caused by thick, corrupted substances; therefore, at the beginning when they first appear, it is necessary to cauterize over the entire length of the fistula with a fine cautery made from myrtle wood, the end of which is heated over fire; or with long radish seeds; or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize additionally at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and if not done so, the excess matter causing those issues will be disrupted, and they will heal from them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it is necessary that this be done immediately after evacuation and phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LX.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On cauterization of blood flow due to accidental cutting of an artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	If the flow of blood from an artery that has been cut is prolonged due to the disease that caused it in the first place, or due to the beginning of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and similar conditions, then it is difficult to remedy that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when such a situation occurs, quickly apply your finger to the opening of the artery, and press on it until the bleeding stops and no more blood escapes.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then place the olive wood cauteries, both small and large, in the fire in great number, and blow on them until they are ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Then take one of those cauteries, either small or large depending on the location and the condition in which the artery is severed, and apply it quickly after you have removed your finger, so that the bleeding is stopped and restrained.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood flows out of the opening of the artery when you remove your finger and take away the cautery, then quickly take another cautery from those that are prepared in the fire, and continue to do this one after another until the bleeding is stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerve that is here, and ensure it does not cause other harm.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	Know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to restrain the blood at that moment, especially when the artery is large, unless one uses one of four methods: either use cauterization as mentioned before, or apply extraction, because when extraction is applied, the extremities are burned and thus the blood is restrained; or wrap it with a bandage made of strong material, or place it on medicines whose virtue is to restrict the blood; and strengthen it with a pillow and appropriate constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	He who administers appropriate constriction with bandages and by wrapping in cloths or placing near burning substances and similar methods should do so slowly.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If anyone attempts this and the physician is not present or there are no medicines available, then gently place the index finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and feel for the strong constriction inside where the blood has stopped from the upper part of the wound, and above the artery the finger should not be moved; and sprinkle it with cold water to cause intense cold within until the blood is congealed and thickened; and then proceed with cauterization or necessary medication.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On incisions and punctures and vents and phlebotomy and wounds and their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter about every illness in which cautery with fire is appropriate and with burning medicine, and the occasions and causes for it, and the instruments necessary for the forms of cauterization; and I have organized the chapters on the superiority of the head over the body.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	In this process in this chapter by that method, so that the seeker may be blessed with it, at the time regarding what they have asked.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, understand, son, that in this chapter it is by means of fear what is in the first chapter about cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because it is necessary that there be great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter many times evacuation of blood may be dangerous, whether from the application of heat to the vein or cutting on an abscess or opening an exit or purging a plague or extracting stones or initiating surgery and similar procedures.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And with all of those, accompany fear and trembling, and in the worst case of their danger, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this does not fall upon you in which there is hesitation, for sometimes the case may lead you to methods of men with many methods of illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And among them are some who become angry about their illness and die because of it, and this due to the vehemence of what they find in their illness, and from the length of their illness, and the illness brings fear which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among them is the one who gives you their belongings and says, "I hope for health from you," while their actual illness is deadly.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore it is not right that you consent to the one who comes to you in this manner; and your caution should be greater than your greed and rapacity; and do not assume any cause about this without proper certain knowledge that verifies what concerns you, and to which praise-worthy success follows.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	For the treatment of all your patients, make a prognosis and indication of the time to which their health is converted, for in that you will have help towards acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, children, may God inspire your mind and not take from you direction and protection, for this is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have organized this chapter distinctly by chapters as it follows the chapter on cauterization, concerning the treatment of the head among other things, so that what you seek and need from it may be made clear to you.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often afflicts children shortly after birth when the nurse presses the child's head too vigorously.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it happens for hidden causes that are not understood.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have seen this illness only in children; and in all those whom I saw it affected, death followed, and thus it seemed to me that its outcome was left to fate.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the swelling of his head was so great that he could not move because of the size of his head, and the humidity increased until it caused death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity may be accumulated between the skin and the bone, or below the bone over the brain.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For when the operation is to be performed and the humidity lies between the bone and the swelling but is slight, then you should make an incision in the middle of the head at one point, and let the length of this incision run two inches along where the moisture flows; and this is the shape of the puncture:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the humidity is more increased and the swelling is greater, then there are two incisions made in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is below the bone, the sign of this is that you see the sutures of the head covered all around and the water is squeezed out when you press it with your hand at the place beneath the skin but not from within.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Then you should make three incisions in the middle of the head in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	and immediately the incision should extract all the moisture; and then dress the incisions with cloths and plasters; and then apply poultices of oil and vinegar over them from the fifth day, and then loosen the bandage and treat the wound with lint and unguents, and bind the head tightly; and eat food that is dry with little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which you should consider according to the size of the swelling and the collection of water, for sometimes it may be more in the occipital region, or in front, or on the right, or on the left; therefore, pay attention to the incision where the swelling and the accumulation of water appear, and do this as best suits you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery, and beware of excessive bleeding, for the patient may die from that loss of blood along with the evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On cutting the arteries near the ears, called hilasseysse.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Second.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When I proceed to treat cases of hemorrhoids or fistulas in the buttocks or around the anus, and if it is necessary to do so, and not to rely on medicines for treatment, then at that time the last resort is to ligature these two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore it is necessary when you want to cut those that the patient shaves his head, and then rubs the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries become visible, and then secure the neck of the patient with a cloth; and then observe where the pulse is felt; and the locations of each near the areas below the ears, and in some people they are hidden.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then place a ligature on the artery with a thread, and then cut each one with a sharp scalpel, making the incision until it reaches the bone, and this should be done according to the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the scalpel below the artery and cut it at the points above the incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, because when an artery is cut, blood spurts out in a pulsating manner, which comes out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear clearly, then you should measure from the ear a distance of three fingers, and then place a ligature with a thread, and proceed to make an incision into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	Of the quantity of blood to be let from a vein, it is one vi uncie, and it is lighter to let from wheat flour or thinner, and all this is according to the quantity which appears of the patient's strength and the fullness of the vessel.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the inflammation, and if there remains any cause of suppuration on the bone, now divide that so that it does not become an abscess from cauterization.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the inflammation with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and afterwards treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of the extraction of veins which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When it happens that someone suffers from acute migraines or sharp headaches due to excessive humidity in the body and qualities in the veins of the temples, or if it is an ancient severe condition similar to these, and treatment with medical methods does not provide relief, then we resort to bloodletting from the veins in the temples, or cauterization of those veins as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction of those veins is that the patient shaves the hair which is in the temples; and understand the visible vein in the temple as it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden only in a few people due to the intensity of rubbing.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then tie the patient's head with some cloth; and afterwards rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the vein becomes clearly visible.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the spatula which has this shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you peel the membrane in which it is enclosed until you reach the artery; and then cut it where necessary to extract it along the partitions until you remove it from the membrane and expose the layers beneath which are underneath it, from all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is fine, then wrap it at the point where you are working, and then cut a part of it according to the amount by which the ends need to be lengthened or shortened, and there will be no bleeding, for if they are not cut in this way, the blood will not flow properly.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate the blood from the vein, about one ounce to three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then tie it in two places with a strong double thread of fine silk or with cords, and do not allow it to become putrefied before the wound has consolidated, so that there is no bleeding.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut away the excess which is between the two ligatures; and do this at that time or another appropriate moment.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone with a knife until the ends are cut, and this will serve as a substitute for that procedure.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to do this when the patient has a fever or is of hot complexion; for cautery helps to dispel final humors, and therefore is better in such cases.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And after the extraction of the arteries, fill the space with dried herbs, and place them on a prepared powder, and then treat it with dry medicines that promote flesh growth and with plasters until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are operating elsewhere there flows blood from the artery, then you should seek to constrict that blood, either by cauterizing or by filling the place with cloth, and strengthen your hand so as to constrict the blood.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes is present to you, then pause your hand on the place until the blood coagulates, and apply cold water to the area until the pain subsides, and strengthen it as needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And the quickest way to extract an artery is to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two cloths, after you have marked the two places with thread, and then apply some ignited material until it reaches the bone and cuts the vein in two places, so that what is between them can be stretched, since it is not consolidated at all with this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two cloths should be noted.  
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if there is keen sharpness such that two knives are better, for if they are as sharp as two knives it approaches each fracture, and do not cut the flesh too quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is any swelling in those areas, the heat of the fire should be applied to them and the flesh should be removed quickly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this method is better than all other methods and faster.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space between two knives be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Regarding the treatment of sharp and acidic tears from the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are acidic tears, and the condition affects the veins that are above the forehead on the head's surface, and if no cause for treatment by medicine is found in this matter, often the face of the patient will turn red, and a sensation like an ant crawling appears on their forehead, and the eyes become so weakened that even the hair around them can be seen clearly, and the eyelids are scorched by the sharpness of the tears. The ancient masters used to treat such cases with this operation, but they did not perform this treatment without reason.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to pluck out the hairs that are on their forehead, and then cut three incisions equally spaced according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length slightly beyond the movement of the tears that flow through the lacrimal passage, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And guard against the beginning of the arteries, which are on both sides, and extend your hand along the continuation of both the jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three such adjustments.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of prepared sponge or dried cloth with which you can dry the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatum of two sharp points, which has this form for the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the edge of the plate to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise from there all the tissue that is between two incisions at the suture which is on the bone, and then make this mid incision from the first to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then stretch this spatum and insert into the first incision another instrument called a knife, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And pause the sharp side against the flesh and the adjacent tissue, and the flat side within the bone, and proceed with it until you reach the midline fissure, and dissect all the vessels that descend from the head to the limbs.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	But ensure that the incision continues along this appearance of the tissue, and then make this in the midline fissure to the other side.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when an equal quantity of blood flows, press the sites of the collected blood clots.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply to each fissure dry linens soaked in vinegar and oil mixed with honey, and place bandages so that no abscess forms by cauterization.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day remove the bandage and administer a great infusion of hot water or decoction, and then cure it with an ointment of basil and rose oil and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of phlegm through catharsis and the expulsion of fluids from the inner parts of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When you encounter sudden and continuous bleeding for catharsis, and sometimes the fluids of the patient are exhausted and scarce, and their condition shows debility, with the eyelids ulcerated and in their place hair loss, and at the temples there is sharp pain and subsequent emaciation, then from these symptoms you should understand that the matter and catharsis do not come but from small veins within the inner parts.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment in such cases is this: that you command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make a small incision at the midpoint of the forehead (beginning from the temple on the left side towards the right temple; and cut through to the bone; extend your hand over the temples which are swollen due to chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth and then fill between the two lips of the incision with boiled cheese or linen strips.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply powder soaked in wine and oil so that it does not become a cauterized abscess.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you remove this and see that the abscess has already diminished, then scrape the bone where it begins to grow new flesh, and afterward treat it with a drying regimen that promotes the growth of new flesh. For example, take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, mix them together, and make a plaster from this mixture to be applied to these wounds until new flesh grows.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the treatment of what affects the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Any cause that affects the ears is one of four types: either it is a mineral stone or something resembling a stone, such as iron or wood; or it is from a plant, such as chaff or beans; or it is fluid-like, such as water and sour wine and their like; or it is some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when a stone affects the ear or any other cause similar to those that do not adhere or clot in the ear, place the ear towards the sun, and if you see the stone, then at that time drop into it some substance of violet oil or cumin, and immediately administer its extraction, and make them sneeze with certain conditions, and plug the nose before the occurrence of a sneeze.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And immediately place around the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the upper parts, as this often helps with these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not expelled, then administer its extraction with the instrument called a small screw extractor, which has the following form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is expelled with the screw, that is good; and if not, then administer its extraction with a fine piece of wood from a few doublings.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not expelled by these methods, then make a tube of reed and insert the tip of the tube into the ear canal and secure around the tube with wax and softened oil so that nothing but the tube enters.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	From there extract the vein with strong traction, for troops watched as we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If it is not forcefully pulled in this manner, now take a thin thread or a piece of equipment with which birds are caught a small quantity, and place that at the end of the vein, and then wrap around that point properly placed.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert it into the ear canal with ease, and then dry the ear of moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it is not forcefully pulled due to all the causes that we have recounted, now you should consider cutting that area which has become inflamed or spasmodic.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of cutting that area is to begin by puncturing the malady of the vein and extract the blood according to the manner of its virtue, and then make a small incision between your fingers and turn the ear upwards, and make a slight cut at the edge of the ear near where it hurts most.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the incision be in a crescent shape until it reaches the stone, and when the stone is found, remove it if possible with appropriate instruments; then close the incision quickly at that time, and care for it until it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause in the ear is one of the growths that have become inflamed, now administer the treatment and the extraction of it; but if you do not obey this method, then take fine cotton wadding in this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer the removal of that growth which is causing trouble in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	If you do not wish to apply water when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, place it in several pieces, and prop extracts near them with onces or subtle gestures, or as we have said concerning incision, for the extraction is easier.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	In the water that has entered into the ear, it is well for the patient to use sneezing with a prepared mixture at the beginning, and fill his own ear with some warm cotton, and then lie on the side where the water is, and if by this means it is expelled, it is good; but otherwise, take small pebbles or stones according to the length of the finger, and heat them slightly in fire, and let the patient insert one of those into his ear canal and jump with one side of that part, striking upon the stone inside the ear with another stone.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Do not remove the stone inside until all the water is expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And the water will be expelled in this way that you take paper or cotton, and put one end of it into the ear and extend the other end towards the fire until the middle part is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And place another piece of cotton and do this as many times as necessary until all the water is expelled, and squeeze it with a cannula as was said above about the extracting stone.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of an object entering the ear, if it is a small thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large object that causes pain to the patient, then administer its removal with gestures and onces, and the cause of this is more serious than all other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it with that which we have said in the division and in the chapter on distillations and do not confound your treatment, then you should expose the ear to the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if there appears any cause of the worms, then extract them with your fingers or with fine tweezers, but if no cause appears, then take a tube that is narrow at one end and wide at the other, which has this form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the narrow end into the ear according to the amount that suffices for the patient; and then suck it out forcefully with a suction tube, and do this several times until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if you do not follow this method, then apply and plug in the circuit of the tube with wax as we have said; then administer distillations that have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, which you will find described in the chapter on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And use the application with which you pour medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, which has this form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or ivory, narrow at the bottom, in which there is a small hole, and flat on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And it should be like a plunger at the end of the tube where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take a reed and wrap one end of it decently with cloth, and then pour oil into the cavity of hearing, or the juice of some herb, or any of these medicines into the tube — and place that end in the ear —, and then insert the reed with the cloth on top and press it gently with your hand until the oil is expelled into the cavity of hearing and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	Take what is to be inserted into the ear and heat it slightly over fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the substance you will apply to the ear is not too harsh, for ear medicines do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of blocked ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes some children are born from their mothers' wombs with unopened ears, and this also happens in some adults, where the ear canal is blocked by infection or flesh growing in it; and this blockage sometimes occurs at the entrance of the ear canal which cannot be seen clearly, and sometimes it is in the parts outside.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And the one that occurs at the entrance of the ear canal, which cannot be seen clearly, is in the most difficult conditions to treat.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in the one where you can see clearly, it is necessary to expose the ear of the patient to the sun and observe it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see an obstruction that is visible, open it with a fine spatula, which has the following shape:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it where the width is small, with one side sharp and the other not; and the spatula should be double-sided so as not to injure the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the blockage is due to hidden flesh in the ear or in the canal, then use fine scissors and carefully cut away all the flesh inside.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if there is an obstruction in the ear canal, then take a thin reed and heat it slightly over fire, and then insert that into the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore, if you find an obstruction with what the patient identifies as causing difficulty, due to hearing impairment, apply pressure gently on it; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place in the ear a piece of lint in the quantity appropriate to the size of the wound you have wrapped with Egyptian cloth; and do this for several days until you are sure that the swelling has consolidated; or take something and soak it in water and sprinkle it with finely ground powder and use it; and if you see the ear already inflamed, then you should extract what you have used and replace it with another piece wrapped in cerate made with olive oil until the inflammation subsides; and thereafter treat it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if there is a bleeding, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that stops the flow of blood, which is described in the chapter on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of eyelid inflammation that occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Inflammation of the eyelids sometimes occurs with moisture, and at other times it is dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you should have these at hand or in small containers, and mix them with the ashes of their roots, and then apply them as finely powdered dust to the affected areas.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If pain and bleeding come from a vein, then at that moment you should cauterize those parts with a fine cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is near the incisions and wounds return when there remains some cause for them; and when they are cauterized with fire, those causes are burned up and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for swelling that comes to the eyelids.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Wounds that remain in the eyelids have a cause similar to swelling in their strength and hardness, and thus they are called swelling.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the eyelid both above and below.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the procedure in such cases is to consider at that moment whether the swelling has arisen within what appears on the eyelid and is spread throughout; and the cause of this is light.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, apply something over that area along the length of the fissure, and then carefully remove it from all parts with ease until it is clean, and then suspend it with an ointment and bandage it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	However, if you are not prepared for the initial treatment and pus penetrates the eyelid through small incisions, then this should not be noted as any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the swelling is large, then you should adjust it with stitches; and treat it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, no harm will come from it because the heat of the treatment will restore and heal it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is inclining toward the inner parts of the eyelid, you should press the surface inside, then lift the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a needle, which you need for incision, and press it from all sides, and if the eyelid because of incision is elongated, this you do not note as any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And after the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with something that heals so that it may be healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the treatment of abscesses above the eye on the eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Abscesses are more common in the layers above the eyelid, especially in children, and they worsen the condition of their eyes, leading to a worsening of their catarrh; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears collect for them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And for this reason you see them lying on their faces all the time, and they sleep with their faces down; and thus their lower eyelids are covered by moist eyebrows, which have become inflamed, and the likelihood of an abscess is apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel tenderness there.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And one method of operation is when the patient rests his head in your lap, and then you place a cloth over him and make a circular incision according to the quantity that contains pus from all sides, and then place that on it and press with your fingers all around so that an abscess forms in the middle of the circle, and then drain the moisture in the middle using a spatula inserted through a small incision, which should not be larger than the incision made in flaubotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	In the main incision cut through the wound completely until you reach the periosteum, for in major dislocations proceed to the periosteum by means of a fissure according to the form of the white line.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract the bandages which you have wrapped around the said limbs at the parts from the inside, and twist them between your right and left hand until they are disentangled.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to probe in the fissure so that you do not reach the bone and damage it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if the artery does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, then probe in the fissure gently until you find the artery; and then extract it as we have said; and afterwards immerse the bandages in warm water and vinegar and place them over the site and sprinkle those with powder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And some people who sprinkle salt and place it in the depth of the fissure to absorb any remaining moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an abscess occurs in the area, now treat it with soothing plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On the methods of palpating the bone.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the bone, there grow hairs beneath the natural ones and when these are plucked, then those harm the bone and cause various illnesses such as frequent tears and softening of the eyelids and membrane, which is called palpating the bone, and it is treated in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with acute medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization; or it is done by incision and suturing; or by canals as I will explain.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Therefore, when you place the clamp on the wound in its place; quickly turn the upper eyelid with your left hand, and if it turns well, that is good; but if not, insert a needle into where there is pus underneath the eyelid, and let the needle penetrate to the base above, near the edge of the eyelid from which hair grows, near the hair, and draw out the pus towards the upper parts under the eyelid, and turn it with the ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then insert into the inner part of the eyelid below the hair adjacent to the lower lacrimal passage entering into the smaller lacrimal; and then extract the pus and place below the eyelid small particles of cork or cloth, and then press on the eyelid with a probe, and it should be as shown in the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, the figure should depend on the amount of swelling of the eyelid, for this varies in people, as some require it to be incised from the eyelid in great quantity according to the extent to which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then insert into the space along the two lines that you have marked, starting from the lower lacrimal passage entering into the smaller lacrimal.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is near the natural hair line as thick as the king's [royal standard or as the king's usual practice].
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the incision at one of the two angles of the jaw, and then excoriate that entirely, and then approximate the wound edges with fine thread or wool floss, and cleanse the blood, and make adhere what excesses of pus remain on two eyebrows for some viscous causes, if you want to do this, and otherwise, do not worry.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	About four days after sewing up the intestines, begin treatment with this.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish to treat the wound without sewing, use something that dries and constricts, since the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the wound and the accumulation of fluid; but sewing is better. This is what the ancients recommended.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, one should be careful about the condition of the wound, and it is good practice, not done out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method for treating the eyelid, which involves shaping it like a myrtle leaf, and then lifting the eyelid by three inches, separated and brought together in this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible to do this, hold the stitches, and if they are uneven, now take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the shape, and position the other side near the larger tear duct, and the second side near the smaller tear duct, and adjust between the said threads for equality, and then lift your hand evenly to raise the entire marked area as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then align the two edges of the wound with the suture, and treat it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if an abscess occurs due to your incision or the wound, treat that abscess with cerate and something similar, and frequently.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes you may need to turn the eyelid so that its side can be incised; then proceed as we have described for incision. But sewing is more artificial in such cases.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To make a needle, follow this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And so you convert the eyelid and divide the figure that is inside as I have recounted; and then by art make two needles or two slender rods whose length shall be according to the length of the eyelid and whose width shall be slighter than the width of the pupil.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already cut into the extremities of each section where the threads are located.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then apply each needle with subtlety over what is superfluous of the eyelid, and constrain the needles in each section with a strong ligature, and leave it for several days, because the excess will die due to the constriction and will be rejected so that it may fall off by itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then cut the needle with scissors, and afterward treat the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not sting.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two needles that you shall make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and the quantity of the length and width should neither be more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the elevation of stinging hairs in the eye using an awl when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When there are unnatural hairs that are hard, rough, and sting the eyes, then the operation is that you take a fine awl and place it in the soft fiber of each hair, and afterward adjust the ends of them carefully and gently.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the fields be one palm in quantity.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And below that, prepare another fine field briefly, and use the extremities of it if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the malate [affected area] in your lap in the proper position, and let it be close to the sun so that your work is clear, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that requires removal, and let it penetrate the eyelid quickly before you extract it from above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair in from above and insert it into another area, and let there be one or two or three hairs and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand away so that the hair is moved to another area on the eyelid with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is pulled to another area and the hair does not move, pull again to the parts below near the field you have prepared with that, so that it is moved to another sufficient place.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And place that in the sight of the eye, for now you will move it to another area and the field, and sew together each part and close the eye with stitches, and leave the stitches for two or three days so that the hair adheres to its place and grows over that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter, now you should attach a long hair from the natural hairs to that one, or leave it so that it grows longer over some space, and then lift it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of an abscess that occurs in the upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When an abscess occurs in the eye, and it is contracted when the eyelid is closed, either to the right or left side, due to poor healing of a wound, incision, or cautery, it is called leporine. This abscess may be either natural or accidental, caused by improper healing of wounds, incisions, or cauterizations, or similar malpractices.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation is such that you should divide that consolidation and separate its lips, place between them a piece of linen cloth, and bind it until it heals.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not advisable to use treatments for it that dry out or constrain it; for if you do this, the abscess will return worse than before and never heal properly.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use treatments that soften it, such as fenugreek; boil the seeds and leaves in water, or use myrrh dissolved in some oil. Then soak a piece of cloth in this mixture and apply it for treatment.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The essence of your treatment is that you should pierce any part that has not healed in its proper form from the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have described is simply a correction of an abscess that does not return to its original form as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the treatment of an abscess that occurs in the lower eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This ulcer which is made in the lower eyelid, which is properly called an ulcer; and it is of two kinds, one natural, the other accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	The accidental kind is caused by plague or by cutting or by cauterization or by other similar means.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation is that you take a needle with which to make double thread, and place it in the flesh, and that you make it pass from the left lacrimal bone into the right lacrimal bone, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then stretch the flesh in the parts above the needle and cut along it with a broad probe.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then if you return the shape of the eyelid as needed, it is good; and if not, take a thread and place that in the incision, and with that convert the eyelid, and close both openings at the lower part of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two openings meet at two corners of the incision, which you have made until they converge, and let there be their formation such that when they come together, a proper shape is formed.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then remove the flesh there in the amount of the width below it, which stiffens the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread; and then treat those with what we have said about softening medicines and poultices until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if through cutting or by means of a wound or cauterization it is necessary for you to make an incision, then you should make a shallow cut along the skin of the eyelid as has been described previously.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the membrane between the two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the speech on the treatment of incisions when they are above or below, it should proceed according to the operation, as has been prepared for the form of the incision, and that is in a variety of shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisans always prepare in every possible way that is possible within their means to restore the figure to its natural form or close to it, and they adapt according to the needs of the operation and the instruments in the best arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in certain individuals such that the eyelid is adhered above to the sclera, and its movement and natural functions are restricted, then you should introduce a probe below the eyelid, lift it up with it, or extend it to the root.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you should cut the adherence with a fine probe, which should not be sharp enough to cause cuts, keeping it blunt so that the patient is not disturbed by the procedure, and move the probe gently so as not to scratch the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be such that it easily separates the adherence so that the eyelid can return to its natural form, and ensure that the entire adherence is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And you put in the wound salt water with which you wash; or distill in that of rose dissolved in the water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And you separate between the eyelid and the wound with a probe, and apply on the wound linen infused in egg white, and after the third day use consolidating remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the formation of swelling and elevation of flesh in the area of the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that swelling occurs in two ways: either it is nervous, and resembles a hard but subtle knot; or it is non-nervous, resembling white frozen moisture, which when touched with a finger does not allow the finger to sink into it, it is separated and the finger does not enter it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both kinds do not begin except from the major tear duct gradually spreading to cover the eye and preventing light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	But the method of working on the swelling is that the patient places their head in your lap, and then you open their eyes, lift the eyelid with your hand, and collect the swelling with a probe by slightly folding it back to the parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert into it a horse hair or ox hair or cowhair, or something similar, or strong thread, and fold the tip of the needle slightly and place it in the center of the swelling, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie with thread the swelling; and extend it to the parts above, and irritate with the hair the edge of the swelling which is near the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you should pull the hair together at the rear.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you should incise the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small forceps, and leave the conjunctiva of the tear duct intact so that by this incision there does not result a continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail is removed with the sun on it extended or with glue, as we have said, and then it should be extracted with a lion-shaped spatula, of which this is the form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal membrane and cause a rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	After the incision, place a small amount of powdered salt or dry paste made from myrrh in it, and leave that for another day; then treat it with water as needed until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not tender and you cannot insert a needle into it, nor is it attached to the flesh underneath, then this particular kind of nail is treated with medications, and it heals as I have said and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish to incise that area, then you open the wound of the malady and take a fine, sharp spatula in the shape described:
am subtilitat.	with delicacy.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it happens that the area is inflamed and swollen and needs treatment at the root, then apply a distilled solution from your own saliva or a dry paste made of myrrh or powdered salt to the wound, and bandage it for another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then proceed with the operation until everything that is there has been removed, except for the opposite abscess which lies in the belly, because at that time you leave it alone and treat the beginning of the abscess until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Then proceed with your operation on that one for the same reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	If the lacrimal flesh becomes swollen and painful in the eye, suspend it for a period of time; then incise part of it, but do not proceed with the incision to such an extent that you cut off the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a dilution of rose petals and sinah (a type of plant) to the lacrimal area until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of styes and of what is born of flesh tightly attached to the eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	In the eyes of some people, small pieces of reddish flesh appear and grow until they cover the pupil, or approach it or protrude over the eyelids, causing the eyelids to be pushed apart in certain areas and resembling a balcony railing.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation in such cases is that the patient rests his head on a pillow; then open the eyes of the affected area and remove all that flesh at appropriate times, using forceps or scissors; then incise the flesh at the beginning until it is completely removed with the scalpel, and be careful not to damage the eye during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And perform your incision with the scalpel that you use to incise these areas or with the spatula that we have recommended for nail incisions, or with small forceps with which hair is removed, depending on the form of the condition as described in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Thus, when your incision is complete and the flesh around it has been thoroughly cleaned, now fill the wound with finely ground salt or sprinkle on red powder similar to corrosive medicines, and cover the wound with a white cloth so that it is protected from abscesses and cautery.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any reason arises to guard against infection and the wound requires cautery, and you fear an abscess from cautery, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess with whatever remedy cures it, and subsequently proceed with the operation once it is healed, and similarly handle the flesh around such a wound as described.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must be careful to remove all healing from the wounded area either naturally or accidentally by iron, and do not use your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member can withstand the operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the Collection of Sutures for Wounds.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Apply red sutures to the veins that are visible on the wound and prevent their operation by dressing, and leave the wound to heal over several days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	At the beginning, you must consider whether the wound in which there is a stitch is strong and if there is no other illness but the stitch; then you should collect that stitch.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you must command the patient to place their head in your lap, and then suspend those veins with a thread or two as per your discretion; and let that thread be of subtle double thickness according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or use two threads gradually in one piece according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And thus bind those veins with fine ligatures, and let the blood little by little, until you see those veins become flattened and turned empty.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful that you do not lead the blood to the extremities of the body; and if your operation is in the morning before the sun, and if you are firm in your operation so as not to incise except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed it, then you should apply distilled vinegar or rue to the blood because of its acidity to corrode what is left of the wound.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible for you to do this all at once, then apply a plaster that relieves the pain, and let it be for several days until the pain subsides and is assured of being free from abscess.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the same method until he is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of nasal fractures.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat fractures with cauterization or with acute medicinal remedies as described and not healed, then do not let them generate in the wound but cut into the abscess when it is ripe, and remove all the humidity that is within until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then you should scrape it with an instrument of this form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	He is called the rough-headed one, and it is made of iron, and its head is round just like this which is made with small pricks by lime or steel points by fine pricking (as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Place that over the corrupted part of the bone, and then rotate it between the said tissues, and press your hand gently little by little until you know that the corruption has been scraped away.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this should be done several times, and then the area should be treated with drying and styptic agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	When the area is consolidated and good flesh has grown in it, and the core of the pus has been removed and remains for forty days without being renewed and without forming an abscess and without any incident occurring, then you know that it has healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, now there is no other way but to reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: first expose the bone with an instrument or with sharp medicine, and when the bone is exposed, then you apply three strips in this manner:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the end of the instrument be triangular, and the shaft of it should be gradually tapered towards the end as you see here.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place that on the bone, and let it be near the lacrimal; extend your hand a little bit, and then rotate your hand with the instrument until it penetrates all the bone, and you will feel the discomfort because of what it finds venting out when you move your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Now, treat the area with styptic and drying medicines as you have been instructed.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Thus when the flesh and the place are hardened, at that time the matter which was flowing to the parts outside returns to the nose, therefore this is easier on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the prominence of the nose.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the nose is prominent in its entirety and no harm or reduction occurs upon touching it, then you should allow the patient to rest, and subsequently cover the neck with windy poultices without scarification and suction with good cupping; then apply a liniment made of aloes, sesame, and sarcocolla over the nose, and finally apply a plaster on the prominent part of the nose using powdered substances.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method for making the powders is to take linen cloth strips, and each strip should be folded into four parts; then make the powder from these strips.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then apply those one over the other according to the amount the nose requires.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Then apply a hard cloth with tight bandaging over them; and repeatedly use the wind poultices with suction without scarification; then remove the poultices and let the nose be tightly wrapped day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if the bandage becomes loose during this time, then it should be made tight again.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	Then remove the bandage as we have said, both day and night.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that the nose has already been reduced, that is good; but if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and tight bandaging and the wind poultices until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the prominence of the uveal tissue.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When you find disruption in the uveal tissue, and it protrudes prominently outside the eyelids like a grain of barley, shaped like a human figure because of this, and you wish to incise it, then during the operation proceed as we have recounted: insert the needle at the edge of the uveal tissue from below and above, and immediately place another needle where the double suture thread is located near the lacrimal area, allowing the first needle to follow its natural position; then incise the site of the double suture and lift that part of the uveal tissue around the needle, strengthening this movement.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then withdraw the needle and pause over the woolen thread infused in egg white, allowing it to adhere to the uveal tissue.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then treat the wound with what will comfort it until the injury is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And in some cases, apply from all sides a circular piece of cloth around the wound to cover the large prominence, and then puncture it with a fine spatula so that it adheres to the wound, allowing the albuminous moisture to flow, and soon the wound will subside.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Then strengthen it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of contusions.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness, called alconati, is not actually running water on the wound but appears similar to it.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	Here is the translation:
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend lower, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if the descent to the canthus with water as we have said is not prepared, now make the patient sit and take a fine spatula and apply it on the conjunctiva just above the panicle near the continuation of the conjunctiva over the tunic cornea at the edge (enter the affected area), so that the pus may be discharged.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once it is discharged, now you should instill warm water in which honey has been mixed, or water in which fenugreek and honey have already been boiled.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it for other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water descending from the eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already discussed the types of water in the division and which is appropriate to puncture, as explained earlier, now do so according to the patient's condition.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now it is necessary for you to have the patient sit between your hands on a cushion and lift their affected eye with your finger, applying gentle pressure.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand near the eyelid of their affected eye if the water is in the left eye; or use your right hand if it is the right eye.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take the needle, if the eye is left; or with your left hand, if the eye is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the tip of the needle near the edge by the thickness of the white of the eye from the inner corner, and then gently press the needle in with your hand.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And so penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the almond is already reached due to wear.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And measure the distance from the almond to the pupil, which is the space between the pupil and the end of the darkness, which is the rim of the eye; for you will see with that pupil through the clarity of the corneal tissue.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And so pause the almond in the place where the fluid is, and then pull it down a bit to another place nearby, and if the fluid descends immediately, then you see the ailment upon which his vision rests immediately, and the almond in its eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then pause for a moment; if the fluid has descended, now pull it down again before the almond is displaced.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it has settled and does not descend, then you extract the almond with ease, and roll your finger in it little by little, and then dissolve a small amount of clear rock salt in the fluid and irrigate the eye with that solution; and then cover the eye with a piece of cloth or stopper or flax infused in rose oil and egg white.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we and those of our time pause over that procedure with egg white applied to the eye.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you cannot place the almond in the instrument of the eye due to its hardness—since there are some people whose eye is hard—you should then take the spatula, which is called an alberid, which has this form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And so perforate with that the conjunctiva, and do not leave your hand in the wound, and only make a way for the almond to move into place.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then he proceeds with the almond as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should prepare the patient for the operation by having them sleep on their back in a well-prepared dark room, and they should be prohibited from any movement.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in the nature of the water so that its nature becomes smooth, and do not move the patient's head to the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And change the bandaging according to its condition on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then untie it in that dark room and show the wound to view, examine some causes, and then re-bandage it on day seven.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And it is not advisable to do this during the hour of surgery or immediately after infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Handle this so that the water can flow freely and quickly due to great and strong attention.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess occurs and needs to be cauterized, then you should untie the bandage before the seventh day and treat it with water to help the abscess drain.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Now you should cover the wound and pause on its surface for several days, allowing it to rest in a dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then move him gradually from that room and converse with him about his condition.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in alchemy, the disciple is not exempt from observing several times, and now you should be confident about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And I have come to us from some of those who know, and some said that they make fire in the Airag magdaam perforated through which the water is sucked.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But however I have not seen anything like that in our land, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is something new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of magdaam by which those who do not know them can recognize them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or proper steel, and their extremities are made with this subtlety, triangular, the sharp end just as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of flesh wounds on the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When on the nose there arise various flesh growths attached, some of which are caused by a condition that resembles a spider web made of thick threads, or a water polyp; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles that aquatic growth.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And it is cancerous flesh, ulcerated, of dark color; and there is flesh like a lion's but not of a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, for the one who has these lion-like flesh growths that are not fraudulent or cancerous, cover it so that the illness feels between your hands and place it in the sunlight, and starve the nose of it, and apply poultices occasionally to those flesh growths.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract it from the parts inside, and then cut out what you have identified of those with a sharp subtle spatula until you know that all the flesh has been removed; if you leave any part for any reason where the excision is possible, then remove it with one of the fine instruments easily so that no part remains for any reason.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the master decides to treat an abscess or boil with cautery, then proceed according to what is necessary; but if it is one of the malignant boils, then incise and cauterize that part which allows the blood to drain and all the cavities to be exposed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And if it is necessary to cut near the nose close to the insertion, use either water or vinegar.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is swollen and the process of moisture extends to the palate, then you will know that it has already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the moisture does not penetrate as necessary, then you will know that inside there is flesh still attached to the excess bone of the nose to which abscessification has not reached.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then you should introduce some thick substance into the area where there is swelling, and use small nuts, placing an amount equal to the width of a finger or less between each nut, and generate the pus, then insert one end of the substance into the nose either through the ray or for another reason that is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And once this has been done, cause the smell to penetrate until it reaches the channels of the nose, and let it sit over the affected area, for diligent observation of such actions is how children are taught in schools, and it is a quick way to achieve the desired effect.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place the two ends of the substance, one end extending out over the nose and the other remaining inside the nose, and then apply a layer of flesh around the nuts that are in the substance, and do this until you know that the flesh is covering the nuts of the substance.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Here is the translation:
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	At the end of the treatment, insert a lead tube into the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you use a drying method of treatment, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument used for nasal irrigation, from which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make this of silver or ivory, which should resemble a small spoon with a rounded end, like a little bowl, and the tube similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you prefer, make a closed tube like a reed, and the tube of the instrument used for nasal irrigation should be flat and open; to which attach a handle at the back, with which you can hold it when heating in oil or water what you want from juices and substances that need to be heated.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this nasal purge is precious: the recipe includes castoreum, white myrrh, ginger, saffron pepper, asafoetida, and spikenard, one ounce each. Mix them with barley juice and cucumber juice, and make pills; dissolve one pill in warm water, and administer it to the patient lying down through the nose.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of swellings in the nostrils.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Swellings often occur in the nostrils, and they are treated with applications and ointments for several days until it becomes clear what course of treatment should be followed.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason, you should insert that at the beginning of its appearance and treat it entirely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Here is the translation:
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the incision is delayed until it becomes hardened, then consider whether it has become pus-filled, hard, dark in color, and with little sensation; at this point do not touch that part with a sharp instrument as it is chronic abscesses; for many times those to whom you incise this abscess will suffer great harm because of that.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is painful to touch and not dark in color, and there are times when an incision is possible throughout that area, then evacuate the pus and incise it without fear, and treat the site with substances that dry and constrict until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On sewing up the nose and lips and ear when the continuity is disrupted by plague or similar causes.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when there is a disruption of continuity in one of these cartilages, few will be suitable for this operation except in some individuals.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when there is any cause for one of these conditions, consider whether it is a fresh wound or the result of blood, and then you should approximate the two edges of the wound with stitches, and subsequently treat it until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the edges of the disrupted continuity are already separated and each is clean and healthy, then you should scrape each part of its visible edge until blood comes out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then approximate the two edges with stitches and strengthen them, and on top of those apply powder from dragon's blood and sprinkle it, and place over the powder a piece of mastic plaster or another consolidating plaster, and leave that for two days or three, and then remove it and change the plaster and continue treating with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	This is the method of suture: you add the solution of continuity with needles as we have recounted in the suture of the abdomen, or you add the solution of continuity with silk as you know.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the extraction of those causes that occur between the two lips in the private parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Often in some men, in the private parts between their lips, there appear hard swellings similar to the gristle of birds, and some of them are smaller and some larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you should turn the lips and split each of those hardnesses from all sides, and then when you make the incision, fill the place with finely shredded wool until the blood is constricted, and then wash it with cold water and treat the area with something astringent until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the incision of flesh that is adhered to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Often there arises on the gum flesh that is adhered to, which the ancients called "albulus," then you should suspend that with a thread or what you have at hand and incise it down to its base, and let the pus or blood run out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then apply to the area finely shredded wool or other astringent powders or substances that promote drying.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, for after the cautery it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the Reason for Pulling Teeth with Iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth in both the inner and outer parts, as well as between the gums, there are sharp, rough spots, discolorations, some areas are blackened or have become greenish or brown, causing corruption to the gum, and thus the teeth become discolored.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands and place his head so that he leans forward, and then remove the teeth in which these rough spots appear and cause sand-like substances to form inside, so that none of them remain, thus removing the blackness and greenish discolorations and other such issues so that they may be cleaned.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If that is what remains as stated at the beginning of the reason, it is good; otherwise, repeat the procedure on those teeth another day and on the second and third days until you reach the final stage as you desire.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that the teeth have the need for various tools of different shapes and sizes according to how you prepare your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore, the razor used to remove the part inside the tooth is different from the one used to scrape between the teeth according to other forms, and you should prepare these various shapes of razors as you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the Extraction of Teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	When you treat the tooth of its pain with all care and delay in its complete extraction, because there is no reason to spare it when it needs to be extracted, as it is a substance that requires removal.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When the patient is forced to have a tooth extracted, you must be certain which tooth is causing pain, for often the pain deceives the patient and they believe it to be in a healthy tooth, and if you extract that one, the pain does not stop until the diseased and painful tooth has been removed, as we have seen from experience with barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, when you must be certain which tooth is causing pain, and once you know for sure, now it is necessary to incise around the diseased tooth with a spatula that has some virtue until it dissolves from the gum completely, and then use your said tools or fine forceps gradually little by little until it comes out.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then hold firmly with large forceps for good leverage or a strong grip, and place the patient's head between your knees so that you have control without discomfort to them, and then pull the tooth straight in such a way that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not loose, now take one of those instruments and place it under the tooth from all sides and endeavor to loosen it as was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is broken or decayed, now it is necessary to fill that break and reinforce it with a thin wire so that it does not break further during your constriction on it with forceps.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you must work carefully when incising around the entire circumference of the gum and be cautious with your strength so that you do not break it or leave any part damaged, and return to the patient for the sake of avoiding further harm, as it is better than causing more pain than necessary.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And guard yourself from doing what ignorant barbers do in their rashness and audacity regarding the removal of [conditions], since they do not administer what we have recommended; for many times they bring about great illnesses upon people, which are more difficult to cure, and the roots of these remain unremoved entirely, or some of them, or that you extract it along with some bones of the jaw as we have testified many times.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And after the removal let the mouth be washed with warm water or salt water.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is bleeding due to this, as often happens, then apply some quantity of sugar and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that does not suffice, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and holding them skillfully with which the tooth is extracted at the beginning should be long, narrow, and thick, so that they do not bend when you are working with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should be like handles of thick material so that when you hold them, they do not bend; their extremities should be short.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of Indian iron with straight extremities, and at the extremities of those there should be teeth, some of which fit into others and hold by strong constriction; sometimes the extremities of these are in the shape of a bird's beak called a ciconia, which is a kite, and they are very strong in their grip.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the removal of teeth and the extraction of bones from the jaws that are trapped.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you must perform the extraction of a tooth that is rotten for some reason, then it is necessary to wait over the place where it will be removed for one day or two until the area is softened; and afterwards insert those tools whose ends are shaped like the beak of a bird called stork or hawk, which have the form of forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of them should be made in such a way as a file or a reed.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if it does not obey when you try with these forceps or tools, then it is necessary to scrape around the root and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument called an atali, which is a small lever whose form is as follows:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it should have a short thick end, and should not be hollow so that it is not broken.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Then if by this the root is removed, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular end in which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it has a triangular and more slender end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And with these instruments, having two prongs of which this is the form as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which I will describe for tooth scraping; because the tool is made like a small spoon, and this is its form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	with a triangular end that is curved or short, which has some thickness, and should not be hollow so that it is not broken.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And know that the instruments for tooth extraction are similar to and resemble the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	And let the skilled and subtle artisan find for himself according to what he understands from the operation and the various diseases; because there are diseases about which the ancients did not say or leave a proper instrument, due to their diverse forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the jaw or any other bones in the mouth is fractured, or if it pains you, then place your hand carefully on that part with what is suitable for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and help it with a gesture of this form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let it be removed little by little, and hold it in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all the bone is completely extracted; then restore the place with suitable medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small abscess in the bone, then remove that of the abscess and its blackness, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the care of prominent teeth over other teeth.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When prominent teeth do not follow their natural course and the form is weak, especially when dealing with women, and particularly with those who are respected; therefore, you should consider: if a tooth is close to another tooth and it is impossible to extract or treat it properly, then root out that one; but ensure it is not attached to another tooth, so use this instrument of which the form is described; it resembles a pig's snout and is made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp point.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And so let your incision be such that you cut it after too many days because of the hardness of the tooth, and let it not be joined by another of the teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is a prominent tooth to be filed, then file that with an Indian iron file, which has the following form:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it be entirely of Indian iron and grind it accordingly; let it have small pointed teeth, just like the file with which needles are made, with which the tooth is filed little by little over several days with ease, so that another tooth is not joined and damaged.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And afterwards line it at the end, and rasp it with some razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth of which a part is broken and you examine the tongue, then you should file down the inside where the sharp edge of that fragment is, so that it is smooth and rounded off, and fill it in so that the tongue does not cut itself and the speech is not impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver filling.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When it happens that the front teeth are loosened or knocked out by impact or accident, and the patient cannot eat properly because of this, and you have treated them with astringent medicines, but your treatment has not been effective, then to prevent further damage, you should strengthen those teeth with gold filling and not silver, for silver will corrode over time, whereas gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the filling be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth; the shape of the restoration is that you take the gold and place twice as much of it between two healthy teeth, and then build up with twists of the filling between one or more damaged teeth, until it reaches the adjacent healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	From there proceed with the tissue into the part from which you began, and stretch your hand with ease and skill so that it is not harmed.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your thread be such that when you pull the needle with the thread of the teeth, it should not slip.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut off the excess part of the needle using forceps or scissors, and attach those parts at each place with stitches, and convert them and conceal them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so that it does not injure the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then sew it as tightly as a Roman stitch.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it comes loose or breaks, pull that or those parts with another needle in such a way throughout its entire length.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and of two damaged teeth, as you see them tied:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it happens that you return one tooth or two back to their proper places, and they grow back as we have described, and they are restored.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And only a skilled and wise artisan can do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes a piece of cow bone is used for a certain purpose, and it is shaped like a tooth, and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is sewn as we have said, and remains and serves there for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the incision of the membrane that is in the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament, which is mentioned above the tongue, can be either natural, with which one is born, or it can be accidental and occurs due to a disease that has already become consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation is that of opening the mouth of the patient, and their head being positioned accordingly; then lift their tongue, and proceed to incise that nerve ligament horizontally until the tongue is sufficiently freed from its attachment.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or swelling in that area, and this has become consolidated due to disease, then you should cut carefully and divide it horizontally until you have incised the ligament and dissolved the swelling.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to make a cut in the upper part of the flesh so that you do not divide the arteries and cause bleeding.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the remnants of the incision with salt water or vinegar or fresh water; and afterwards place a linen pad below the tongue. This is to be done so that the patient keeps something under their tongue each night to prevent it from healing too quickly in another manner.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if bleeding occurs, place over the area vitriol powder; but if the blood flows continuously, then cauterize the location with a hot cautery that is appropriate for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then proceed with the treatment using other methods until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the Extraction of a Ranula Underneath the Tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	At times, an abscess similar to a small swelling appears underneath the tongue, preventing it from performing its natural functions; and gradually grows larger until it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	In the operation, place the patient sixty paces from the sun and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of dark or black color and hard, to which the patient has no sensation, then do not touch that which is gangrenous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is inclined towards a whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you put the incision into it, and cut it with a fine scalpel, and cut it from all sides; and if blood flows during the time of your operation, then pause and apply vitriol above three times, until the bleeding is stopped.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have treated it properly, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; and treat it with the other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from both ears and those in the throat and other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When dealing with abscesses in the throat area, which are glands that are somewhat assembled together and appear as if they are ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and they do not heal, then consider whether the abscess is hard, dark in color, and with little sensation; at this point, do not touch that which is gangrenous with a tool.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch that with an instrument due to the flow of blood; instead, leave it until it has matured, and either you will remove it, or it will burst on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, hard, and the layer beneath it is thin, then at that time it should be cut open.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is what you consider before your operation, whether the abscess has already rested from the heat or if it has been reduced in any way; and then make the patient lie facing the sun, and his head towards you, and open the mouth of the patient, and the assistant takes between their hands the tongue of the patient downwards with an instrument of noble form, which is shaped as follows:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or iron, and it should be thin like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then when you press with that the tongue and the abscess is shown to you, then apply your instrument carefully over it, take some of it out, and place it in a container, and pull it out to the sides as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or take something from the tunics, and then cut it with an instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it resembles forceps, but the ends of it are curved, so that the opening of each one is opposite the other, sharp, made of iron.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not available to you, then cut it with a scalpel of which this is the shape: It should be sharp on one side and not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have cut one slit, cut the other in the same manner of cutting, and then the patient should rinse with water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If blood flows, guard yourself with water from the decoction of thorns of mulberry or leaves of myrtle and similar to those of styptic causes until the flow of blood is restrained, and then cure it once it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes pus appears in the armpit or as abscesses in those two ears, and incise them according to what is said about the incision of two breasts similarly.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I had already treated a woman with an abscess which was born in her armpit, the abscess tending to a dark color, with little sensation, which had closed her arm pit, and the woman breathed very narrowly, and had prohibited her from eating and drinking water, and she would have reached death if may not have been for one or two days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had burst so much that it made two channels through which it discharged by two tracts.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I carefully examined one of the channels and pulled it out, removing its large portion, and then I incised that which included the other tract, and then I closed the opening, and covered it with a dressing, and then I placed the channel in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I removed a large part of it, and only a little blood flowed from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then the armpit of that woman was completely open, and she began to drink water immediately, and soon after started eating food. I did not stop incising that abscess multiple times over a long period, and an abscess formed in place of it, which needed to be incised to prolong its healing.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Thus I applied a cautery to the wound and dressed it properly; then I walked around not knowing what God had prepared for me in that regard.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the incision of an abscessed wound.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the discharge from the wound is directed downward and it is abscessed and elongated, it is then called perpendicular; and if it is thick and round at the lower part, it is then called a boil.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is cured with what we have described in the division and does not conform to your treatment, and you often see that although it has been cauterized, it persists subtly, then you should incise those that are aggregated and round. And if they extend along a certain length and are bloody, of dark color or black, and do not respond to this method, then you should attempt the incision because there is concern about potential harm.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it as I have described by its whiteness and length, make the patient lie down and press your tongue against it with an instrument that conforms to its shape and then place the thumb below, pull it downward, and incise it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the double incision procedure.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And you should not incise it more than what is appropriate according to the natural term without excess, for if you incise too much, you will harm the patient.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And after the incision, use what we have recommended for the double incision procedure, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient is terrified by the incision, use an instrument in the cauterization of him without fear, and the method of the cautery on him is nothing but sharp water, and that you place the head of the patient on your lap, and then press the tongue of him with the instrument which we have said, and then take the water which we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and confirm it on that cause alive, and place that not thick nor thin, and with that fill the concavity of the instrument whose form is this:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the extremity of him who is cauterized be where the medicine is placed just as the cauterization of a ladle of reed, and place the instrument with the medicine on the wound, and the patient lies on his back so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person does not fall due to the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not descend from any cause onto him and contaminate that.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then take your hand with the medicine and apply that to the uvula for a short while until you see it become blackened and numb due to the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take a piece of cloth and wrap it around the end of the reed, and dip the cloth in the medicine, and insert the reed with the cloth into a tube so that the cloth adheres to that tube, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and then leave it as it dries and falls off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and after the cauterization clean around the uvula with a cloth soaked in vinegar, and modify it with what is around it of the medicine, and wash it with rinsing water, and treat it from outside with embrocation, and heal it with remedies until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of treatment is safer than incision and less lengthy from fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	In some cases, the uvula is treated with something that is milder than cauterization and incision, for it is cured by subfumigation in this manner: take a poultice, hyssop, mint, rue, Arabian saffron, chamomile, and similar herbs; mix all these ingredients or some of them in a pot, and steep them in hot vinegar, let them boil; the pot should be heated moderately with coals, and place on it a tray upon which rests an instrument made of straw according to this method; it is made of silver or straw.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the extremity into the mouth of the patient so that the steam reaches the uvula, until the uvula is sufficiently treated and becomes clear.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And repeat this procedure several times until it is dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the onset of abscesses, as it would be too harsh for the abscess, and you should not do this; instead, you must wait for the formation of an abscess before cauterization.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if this instrument is not available to you, take a cane and attach a hollow tube at its end, so that the mouth of the patient is protected, for the tube prevents the steam from entering the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of spines and what adheres in wounds and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Move gently around the belly or spine of the patient or for some other reason.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then look for what is visible among those things, upon which your eyes focus, and then press the tongue with an instrument in sunlight so that it may be made clear to you what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because a strong adherent attached to the throat will be easily expelled by vomiting; or give the patient a piece of bread or a leaf of lettuce or a dry biscuit to swallow; or take a piece of dried sea sponge and bind it firmly with thread, and then let the patient swallow that, for when it reaches the place where the adherent is lodged, there it will easily expel it.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take an eel and bind it with thread, then place it inside and gradually extract it; or take a probe and gradually insert and withdraw it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if it is not expelled by the methods we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead in this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be as thick as a small reed, and at the end of it there should be a curved part that you can easily insert into its throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And let the patient lie with his head raised up, and be careful not to touch the bones of the throat, so that it does not harm him or cause pain in the bone or spine, or hurt the doctor's hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, let the patient take honey, because of his knowledge of the place of the cause annexed and enveloped within him, and he inserts his hand with the instrument in it, all this according to the quantity which is prepared for him until it is expelled.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter xxxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the Removal of a Leech Attached to the Throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When treating a leech with what we have mentioned in the division of treatment with medicines and compresses, consider the position of the patient's throat relative to the sun, after you have pushed up the patient’s tongue with the instrument that we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you see the leech, remove it gently with a small forceps or with a fine instrument carefully.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to remove it with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's throat, and immediately place a heated iron in the concavity of the cannula. Do this as many times (until the leech is dead and falls off) and the patient must abstain from water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a jug full of warm water and pour it into the patient’s mouth, and wash the mouth with it; and do not let any cause remain in the mouth, and have the patient swallow the water for an hour afterward with his hand, because as soon as the leech feels the water it will catch.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	However, if it is not expelled with what we have recommended, then熏use smoke to fumigate the patient with camphor or asafetida using the instrument that we have recommended for fumigating the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	In this way, then in which position it lies.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another method of operation by fumigation, which is that you take a jar in which are burning coals and the jar is covered with a cloth in the middle of which is a hole; and fit the end of the instrument into this hole; and place it above the smoke; and have the patient put his mouth on the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the fumes do not escape until you know that the fumigation has reached the blood-letter, for the blood-letter will immediately fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not work, then you repeat the fumigation as many times as necessary, and abstain the patient from drinking, and give dry and salty foods, and do not allow water, and likewise it is necessary that this regimen be followed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which the blood-letter is treated when it is seen in the groin; and it resembles forceps as you see them, but with some curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed in the groin, and the end of it resembles the beak of a stork, which is sharpened with a file, so that when it compresses something, it does not slip.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the speech on the preparation for abscesses and their incision.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are many species, of many kinds, as will be recalled for each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And there are various methods of puncturing and incision for them in two ways, one of which is according to the nature of the abscess itself; and by what they obtain from the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is appropriate for the locations where they occur in the body, because an abscess that occurs in the head is different from one that occurs in the buttocks; and an abscess that occurs in a fleshy location is different from one that occurs at a joint; and each has its own treatment through surgery.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And there are some abscesses that should not be punctured but only after the pus has properly matured or in their completion.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	There are other abscesses that should be drawn out when they are crosswise and have not matured according to their completion, just as abscesses that are near joints; because when an abscess approaches a joint, its nature is prolonged within what surrounds it, and if the tendons or nerves of that joint become corrupted, it can cause contraction of that limb. Or if it is close to a principal member, and you delay puncturing it until it matures, it will endanger the principal member; or if it is near the buttocks, then puncture it before it has matured; but do not puncture it raw, without proper digestion, except for one near the buttocks so that the pus does not spread to other parts inside the buttocks and form a fistula, or be done in such a way that it cannot heal.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But it is important that you know the right time to puncture the abscess, and that is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you should know that it is mature when there is relief from pain and the cessation of fever, along with a reduction in hardness and pulse, and the sharpness at the top of the abscess, as well as other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you should know that the puncture should be made in the place where the pus is below the abscess and coming from the swelling.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the puncture should always be made along the length of the flesh or body if the abscesses are in the limbs or the chest and in places such as ligaments, tendons, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all other areas where there is no reflection; for in those that reflect, use a puncture according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is better to delay the puncture until the second stage of digestion is confirmed, as we have said; for if you puncture it before that, it will prolong the illness of the patient and cause great foulness, and make the lips of the abscess harden and deepen.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some abscesses should be punctured across the width of the flesh or body due to necessity, or according to what the member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you should administer a small puncture, and in large abscesses, a large puncture or multiple sections according to the variety of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other abscesses in which the incision should be hollowed out and opened up, when it is made as if by bread dough and is done at a time when it has already hardened, just like those that occur with too much swelling and boils.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised in a section having three corners; and of those that are incised like the shape of a myrtle leaf, just like the abscesses of the armpits.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And there are also those in which a circular incision and a crescent-shaped incision are made, similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But for one who does not have such swelling as abscesses or superficial tumors, you should pierce it with a shallow puncture, or just plane it out.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has already collected pus, you should pierce it but do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that moment; having extracted one portion from it, on another day scrape the abscess internally, and then extract a larger portion, and continue doing this in several stages according to its degree until it is healed.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is a young man, or a pregnant woman, or an infant, or an elderly person in debility, because their vital spirit is very weak and depends much on the evacuation of pus, and the patient easily dies, so you should operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Therefore, guard this chapter with great caution, and when you make the puncture in which you pierce these abscesses, make sure to clean the plaques and then consider whether the plaque of the abscess is small or if it requires a flat incision; at that time, administer some of it or use cotton. If the abscess is large and the wounds from the puncture are many, then you should place a plaster on each wound until they heal.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the cord is severed or you have concave it around the circumference, then you should fill it with old linen or thread made from cloth, as when you treat pustules or boils without moisture; and strengthen that on the third day; then proceed to care for it according to what is needed from ointments until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If blood flows during the time of your operation, then you should prepare water and vinegar in which to dip a cloth, and place that over the spot where the blood is flowing for several times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the flow of blood persists, then you should administer treatment and care as well as powders which I have recommended in various places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is near many nerves, then you should infuse powders in vinegar and burnt oil, and place those on the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you should place powders soaked in water and oil or in vinegar and oil, and let all of this be rubbed into the area for three days, as we have said. Then you should open the abscess, cleanse it, and administer to its cure what is appropriate until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses generally, but according to the method of distinction I have already mentioned for each type of abscess in what manner is the way of its cure separately.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On the sectioning of abscesses that occur in the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the neck of the head, small abscesses may occur, along with various types of nodes that contain membranes; and these types vary in many ways.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they are soft, and those contain moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	Of those among which I contain humidity similar to flour, and resembling them; and of those that are stony, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as the extraction of those does not oppose the structure.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you express them with an instrument whose form approaches this, which is called an entrobes, until you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what it contains is humidity, then you should divide that with a longitudinal section according to a superficial section in this manner:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin in the section of the line from .B. to the line of .G. Therefore, when the humidity is evacuated, you should excise that skin which contains that humidity and leave none of it remaining, for if any part is left behind, it may return as a cause of illness.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse the piece in Egyptian ointment if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that wound with this mixture and leave it for another day, for in this way you will dissolve everything that remains of that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply the Egyptian ointment to that piece again, secondly and thirdly if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin; now treat the wound with the ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains hard nodules, then you should incise that according to this method:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a section having the shape of a cross, and place stitches between the two lips of the incision and explore it thoroughly, and exert your skill in extracting the membrane that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If your arrow wounds are in opposition to what I have described first, then do as I have recounted subsequently.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly treat the suppurated abscess with regard to its section and cure as we have told you; and the section of a suppurated abscess is easier, because it contains little blood and less moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes there are abscesses in the head of certain people who do not have much moisture throughout their body; the reason for this is that I once incised an abscess on the head of an old woman and found it as hard as a stone, rough, white, and unable to be squeezed, such that if someone were to strike it, they would cause pain.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	However, in other abscesses that occur in the head, this is not the case for this chapter; similarly, for abscesses that appear on the heads of children and behind the ears, the section should be a superficial incision.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the puncture of those from the lower part so that the contents of the abscess can drain into the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then treat those according to what is appropriate for that condition.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the incision of scrofulas that occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These abscesses often occur in the neck, armpits, and groin; and sometimes they appear in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck often develop between the muscles, and every scrofula among them is within its own proper layer, just as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The types of these scrofulas are spots, for only some of them are stony, and of those only some contain moisture, and of those only the malignant ones which do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Then in that one which you find to be well disposed during the examination, whose color is similar to that of the skin, and which is soft throughout, does not adhere to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not adhered to; it is necessary for you to incise it at a superficial dryness above the part from the upper part of the body down to the line of .G. between the line of .B., and peel it off entirely, extending both sides of the skin towards the armpit or even further if there is need for that, as we have said regarding abscesses on the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more cautious that the vein or nerve not be incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatula not be sharp, so that it does not injure your hand during the incision, or disturb the patient, and do not incise what is unnecessary; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and prohibit yourself from continuing the operation, then apply green vitriol powder or other powders which promote blood flow, and staunch the wound, and leave that inside where the acuteness of the abscess subsides, and let the inflammation be mollified and begin to heal.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood has been separated.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation once you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire at the time of the operation if there is any cause for other small scrofulas, so you can incise those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if there is a large vein in the region of the scrofula, do not incise that scrofula in its vicinity.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	And beware that you apply to it a very strong bandage and that you leave it in such a way that it falls by itself without harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old lint which you have already soaked in Egyptian onion juice, and then treat that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise that scrofula completely, then make sure to approximate the two lips of the wound and sew them together immediately so that there is no room for any superfluity.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is excess superfluity due to the size of the scrofula, then you should understand that it is necessary to incise its root, and extract it and administer sutures as mentioned.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for the scrofulas that contain humidity, make a superficial puncture where it appears to you the location of maturity, and pause in piercing until the pus from deep within the body comes out, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then proceed with puncturing, apply dressings and treatments appropriate for those conditions, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see the wound already cleaned, then treat it with a dressing of generative flesh so that it heals.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the incision of the pustule of an accidental abscess in the groin.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	Thus did the ancients call this section in the epitome, and I have not seen any man in our land who performed that operation.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those people.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In men who have a weak constitution, it is advisable to avoid the extraction of the epilhot, as this can be harmful because all the veins and major vessels are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have abscesses in the mouth or throat or near the ears, when the illness is not in the bone, it is advisable to use the section of epilhot to avoid the loss which is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do this, cut the epilhot below three circles of its circles, or four if it is a small section along the latitude in that which lies between two circles by quantity, so that the section be in ciphac, not in cartilage, and this place is suitable for cutting because it lacks flesh and the blood vessels there are thin.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the physician is cautious, it is better to extend the throat skin by one inch and then make an incision until reaching the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any reason to do so.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut the ciphac as we have recommended; and it is significant for the section of the canal by the membrane which is attached to what is divided there and by the abscission of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Thus when the hour arrives in which the perforation is feared, join two lips of the wound, and leave it alone except for the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Al-Bucasis says that the essence of what we have discussed is to observe that some of these abscesses have already obstructed the airway of the patient, and the patient has come close to death, and the throat has been cut open, and some will incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the site of the wound, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And by this commandment allow the wound to remain open until the poison of the illness is consumed; and the poison remains in him for three days; and thus at that time command the wound to be closed, and care for it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen myself is that a servant took a knife and cut it into their own throat, incising part of the windpipe, and I was called to treat them. When I arrived, I heard the moaning like that of one near death, uncovered the wound, and found the blood that had flowed from the wound in small amounts.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Thus I confessed that she had not cut any vein or artery, and air was coming out of the wound, and I treated her until she was fully healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And the servant did not suffer any harm except for hoarseness in her voice, and after some days she returned to improvement in her condition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And here you should know that in the section on the epilation there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the section on the abscess which occurs in the groin, and is called a hernia of the groin.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess called a hernia of the groin is large according to the constitution of the body, and it occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it happens in two ways, either naturally or accidentally.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, there is no need for treatment.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental case happens in two ways, one of which is similar to fatty nodes, and the other way is similar to an abscess caused by the constriction of an artery, and in that case there is reason for concern.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it should not be attempted to treat with iron unless it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should examine it carefully as described, and if you find it similar to fatty nodes and not attached to any veins, then you cut it open as you would with nodes, and extract it with water containing oil and bursiclam; and if not, then thoroughly investigate its nature, and subsequently treat the area with what is needed for proper healing until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the section on types of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	There are various types of nodes, and I have already described all their types in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	Here is the translation:
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Thus I say that in evacuation there is heat and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the superfluity is stilled; and putrefaction is completed when then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But in the case there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and one proceeds as with the lion's wound which is done on a special sac.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it depends on the color of the skin, and its beginning is like a boil, and it is treated as such, whether major or minor, and there are two kinds: one dry and containing little moisture, and the colors of moisture are various, as I say in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Thus, when you come to the treatment of wounds, express it and inquire about its origin at the beginning, which is called an intercurrent cause, as will be explained in the chapter near this one.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of inquiry for abscesses and all wounds, which is to take this probe and insert it into the most humid part you find in the abscess, and you will move it slightly until you know that the probe has already penetrated the tissue.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And next to last, measure the size of the abscess accordingly, and then extract the probe and examine what has come out in its wake.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the moisture comes out freely, of whatever color it may be, then you shall incise it superficially as I have said regarding other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture in the marks left by the probe, then you know that it is dry.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And draw upon the dry surface a cross-shaped section according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	And do as you have been taught, and suspend that section by threads, and scrape off the skin from all sides with ease, and keep the hair or sack if possible on it, and extract that pus at the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is ruptured during the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and apply dressings for this, and then you will extract it in stages until none remains for any cause.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if it remains in any amount, little or much, the abscess will return according to the cause.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that some part remains, then complete the treatment with some caustic powders and apply them to the affected area, and place on it something suitable for an abscess, and treat it with another method until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the abscess is large, then you should cut both sides of it and treat it with what promotes healing.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if a pulsating or non-pulsating vein is against it, then you should cauterize and fill the place three times with vitriol and leave it open for two days or three until the inflammation subsides and the blood coagulates; then return to incise what remains of the abscess.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of the instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those, there are forms of the instruments, which are of three kinds: some are large, some are medium, and some are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of introduction is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of intermediate introduction is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of small introduction is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Prepare sharp instruments, clean cloths, and neatly arranged extremities, so that you can promptly proceed with the instrument in the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are called albered, and one of them is called berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three kinds, one of which is large, another intermediate, and the third small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the great experienced one is as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the intermediate experienced one is as follows:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small experienced one is as follows:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	Prepare yourself for those abscesses, excisions, fistulas, and buboes, so that you can address them, as they affect the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And you should make hooks, large needles, and sharp instruments similar to thick needles with which sutures are attached. They can be made of citrus thorns, or iron, or silver, and the best ones are those made of citrus thorns.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the experienced ones use black feathers to probe fistulas, agreeing that by using them, they can explore the depths within which there are reflections, as these feathers are light enough to be reflected in those areas.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And there are three types, some of which are long, others intermediate, and the others short, depending on the width of the fistula and its constriction.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the large lead plate:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the medium lead plate:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small lead plate:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the hooks are of various types, some of which are simple curves, and there are three kinds: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And their hooks are of various types, and there are three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those hooks that have two curves, there are three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those that have three curves, there are three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of a large simple hook, its form:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a medium simple hook:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small simple hook, its form:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a large curved hook:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a medium curved hook, its form:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small curved hook, its form:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a large hook with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a medium hook with two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small hook with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a large hook with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a medium-sized hook having three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small hook having three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the knives with which nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped; they are of three kinds: one is large, one medium-sized, and one small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a large knife:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of the medium-sized knife:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of the small knife:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those with which section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not blunt, nor are they placed in such a way that there is fear of cutting into a vein or nerve during the scraping of nodes; rather, this is done so that the patient may be healed quickly from the disease and find some tranquility due to the adjustment following the excision of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of forceps, and they are of three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the large forceps:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of the medium-sized forceps:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of the small forceps:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of iron and resemble reeds from which alcohol is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And on its lateral extremity, there is a punctured area where the spatula is concealed, and in that place it connects to both internal and external parts as you can see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulae, which are hidden among the said fingers for the incision of abscesses and which I do not perceive in female patients, are of three kinds: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of ligatures with which the blood flow is interrupted are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; the forms of these are:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of fine thread, round but of some length, and they are delicate.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that these kinds of ligatures be large, medium, and small, so that with them you can interrupt the blood flow quickly when needed, and at times when there is no other medicine available.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to interrupt the blood flow in every part of the body, and use them only in fleshy areas such as on the thighs and shoulders, and on the fleshy parts of the arms, breasts, abdomen, and similar fleshy areas.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes other small tools resembling the teeth of combs are made in this form; with which the blood is interrupted when performed by phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round in this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of the breasts of men, which are similar to those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some women have swollen breasts when they begin to menstruate, and some have them swollen when they are pregnant or during menopause.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for that which you wish to treat, cut it in a lunar section according to this form, from the line of .B. to the line of .G., and then excise all the granulation tissue, and then fill the wound with flesh-growing medicine, and then sew together the two lips of the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the breast inclines to the sides and is softened due to its size, as it often does in women, then divide it into two parts along its pus-filled areas, each part resembling a lunar section, such that each contains the other at their ends, with the larger line containing the smaller one according to this form from the line of .B. and the line of .G. Then excise the diseased tissue between the two lips of the wound, remove the fatty tissue, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders as necessary until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the patient's restlessness and blood flow, then fill the wound with cloth submerged in corrosive liquid and leave it until this corrodes what remains of the fat, and then care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the Incision of Abscesses that Occur Near the Testicles.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that occur near the testicles are of the type of scrofula, hard, and they contain a skin that is tough.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those few that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture must be incised in a crescent shape according to this figure: from the line G to the line B. And when all is evacuated of what is in the abscess of the sore, then fill it with boiled wool and leave it for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And after the poultice is removed and it is treated with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the type of the glands or scrofula, then you should incise it as we have said in the section on scrofula equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the inflammation has spread to where putrefaction is present, then administer cautery as we have previously described.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the Incision of Abscesses That Occur Due to Artery or Vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured and the cicatrix has become hardened that lies over it, then abscesses often occur. The signs by which one can recognize whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: for when an abscess is due to an artery, it tends to be elongated in the front part of the body; and if you press on the abscess with your fingers, you will feel a sound like a hissing.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And an abscess that is due to a vein is round and appears on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the incision for this abscess is dangerous, especially when it occurs near the armpits, in the angles, and on the neck, as it can be very serious; therefore, its treatment should be avoided with care. When it occurs in the extremities or on the head, it should also be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	May it be concerning him who is due to the inflation of the artery orifice, cut in the dry section along its length; and near the incision about an inch and near the artery, and remove the tunics until it is revealed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And nearby place upon that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and tie the artery with a double knot in two places, which cause I show you by drawing out of two arteries which are found in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And nearby apply the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula so that the blood escapes completely from there, and let the abscess dissolve.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer treatment in which pus is generated so that the ligaments fall off; and subsequently treat it with appropriate bandages until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess due to the section of a vein, now you should have in your hand what is possible regarding the abscess and nearby insert the needle below the place where you had below your hand, and make it penetrate; and tie it with a double thread so that you can extract it from the other side, and then ligature the abscess with a good bandage as I have told you in the grapevine bandage on both sides of the thread's ends.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	And if you fear that the thread will be extracted, now insert the knot with the needle below all the abscess beyond the initial puncture of the first needle, and tie the knots in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And then dry the abscess in its middle part so that when what is inside has come out, you incise the excess of the wound, and leave what is attached to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then pause and apply powder in which you have mixed with vinegar and oil, and then administer the treatment made with cauterization and herbs until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter on the abscess which occurs due to the twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Just as an abscess can occur in arteries and veins, similarly, an abscess can occur in nerves when they are struck or due to excessive labor, and by analogy.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is done to relieve the pain in the places where assistants or the heel are involved, or in any place where the joints are accustomed to pain.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the surrounding tissue, and it is among the worst conditions when it is constricted by inflammation, and the patient appears in a state similar to stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess that forms in the front part of the body, and because of this, it is less painful, and it affects all parts equally without being more severe in front or back.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, for those who have it in the joints, it should not be wrapped in iron, as it would likely lead to contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But for one who has it in the head or on the forehead, relief can be found using spatha (a type of therapeutic application).
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small abscess, then treat it with poultices and incise it carefully.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if it is large, then suspend treatment with incisions, and scrape it out; and close the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter I.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the incision of an abscess that occurs on the cheek which affects the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Therefore, for some people there are growths in their abdomens and other parts of their bodies which are called fungi because they resemble mushrooms, whose root is fine and the head is large; and often the lips of these are smooth, and it can be small or magnificent in size.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one such case where in his abdomen there were two growths that resembled mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones with fine roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those were inverted and would split open, and moisture would constantly run from them.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, I incised them and found inside one weighing about eighteen uncias and the other about ten uncias.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the procedure during the incision of such growths is that you consider whether the patient is humid, and if the color of the tumor is white and humid with a fine root; then you should incise it with a broad scalpel, and immediately in your presence cauterize it over fire, because for such growths the section should expel much blood; and if the blood flows, cauterize that area.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the patient is afraid and hesitant, refrain from incising with an iron instrument; instead, take some recent lead plaster, apply it to that tumor, following the method we have described; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then apply a strip of lead plaster around the tumor; therefore, do not stop applying the lead continuously until the tumor is detached and falls off on its own.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If it is a wound of thick flesh, then at the time of incision there may be cause for fear and dread, especially in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you may incise most of it, and then immediately cauterize what remains so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then take care of the inside until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to presume to incise a wound that is of dark color, with little sensation, and somewhat hard, for such may be cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And this will serve as a reminder of these points.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of a swelling of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	A swelling of the navel is caused by various reasons; either by fissures in the ciphac which is on the abdomen, and then placing there linen or intestine as with other ruptures; or by a sore from which blood or pus flows, depending on what is present; or by trapped air.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to a fissure in the abdomen and the placement of linen, then the color of the swelling is similar to the color of the skin; it is soft without pain, and soon appears in various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the protrusion of an intestine, then its appearance differs greatly from what we have described, and when you press on it with your fingers, it retreats, and soon returns; it lies lightly on the skin, and is easily reduced by bathing and hard work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	May it be that by moisture, the parts are like lions and are not hidden when you press them with your hand, nor are they constricted, nor are they hard.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to poison, then these signs appear as the abscess turns to a declining blackness.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	May it be that if it is due to dead flesh, then the abscess is severe, large and hard, and is seated in proportion to a quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	May it be that if it is due to gas, then the touch of it is like a lion.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in this case is that you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to poisoning by an artery, or a vein, or gas; then it behooves you to be cautious about treating it, for there is fear and dread as I have taught you in the chapter where I have discussed abscesses caused by arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the bowel or the membrane, then it behooves you to command the patient to lie on their back and stand extended; then feel around the circumference of the entire navel, and then command them to stand between your hands on their back; then surround with a spatula across the circumference of the navel at the place where you have marked with your hand; and then extend half of the abscess upwards by about an inch; and then tie around the circumference with strong wax or thread in the proper manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then cut the center of the abscess extended over the ligature and insert your finger into that area to explore the bowel; and if you find it or protect it with the ligature, then you should evacuate it immediately and urge the bowel towards the inner parts of the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the cloth, then take one ounce of it; and incise the superfluities from it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	And if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that spot, and return to your operation; take two needles and place in those two strong threads and interlace the two needles in the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a crisscross manner, which you should make penetrate; and then press the abscess into four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and let the place ooze where the flesh is extended and falls off by itself; or incise it when it has become softened and can be oozed out, and then treat it with what is needed from the medicines until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is fleshly or due to moisture, then you should deal with the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or moisture that you find there, and then treat it with what is needed and which will consolidate the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De curacio de cranc.	On the Treatment of Wounds.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said in the division about the types of wounds and how to treat them with medicines, and that it is necessary for the treatment to proceed properly so that the wound does not become ulcerated; and we have discussed the nature of wounds generated by carefulness and caution in their treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that in some cases wounds can be treated in a place where it is possible to eradicate them completely, just as with wounds in the mammary glands or on the breast and similar parts of the body allocated for removing everything, especially when they are beginning small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When it is old and hard, do not try to treat it yourself, for I cannot heal such a thing nor have I seen anyone else do so, nor has anyone reached that.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is when it is prepared as we have said, you should proceed and leave the patient to purge from black bile several times, and then let it bleed if any congestion is found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for the operation in the manner in which it is to be performed, and afterwards apply the hooked instruments that are needed for it; and then hollow out completely with a sharp knife for proper excision so that no cause of recurrence remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow freely, and do not apply poultices to it hastily, and squeeze out the pus, and remove the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is suitable for this purpose.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you find thick blood congealed in a vein or artery, then cauterize it as soon as the flow of blood has stopped, and afterward treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 46.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the Treatment of Hydrops.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, the types of dropsy related to water, and the signs of each type, as well as the treatment for it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And the type that is treated with bloodletting is only the single type of anasarca, and not applied to the types of tympanites or hydropsyarchy, for these are fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this kind of tympanitic hydrops with medicines and do not apply your treatment anymore, then consider whether the patient has reached debilitation or is suffering from another illness with similar hydrops, just as if it were in the chest or abdomen and similar cases. At that point, be careful not to treat them with iron, for there is danger in doing so.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you see the patient with excessive vigor and there is no other illness except for hydrops alone, neither in infants nor the elderly, then the method of the operation on them is that you lift the patient between your arms, and have an assistant press the abdomen of the patient with their hand, squeezing out the water from below the navel, and immediately take a spatum spinosum according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should consist of two sharp parts that are long, with sharp ends like a spatum; however, there should be some slight tapering gradually, so that during the operation you do not penetrate into the bowel, and thereby harm it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the origin of the hydrops is from the bowels, for then it is necessary that you distance yourself from the navel by three finger breadths when making the incision, on the side below the navel.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the origin of the hydrops is from a kidney ailment, then your incision should be to the left of the navel by three finger breadths.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the origin of it is from the liver, then your incision should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side on which the patient lies, so that the fluids do not rush to that location and cause harm.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	With an instrument, perforate the entire wound, and then insert it into that section, and raise your hand with a spatula between the wound and the tissue, and you will scrape that; and if in quantity of one stripe or so.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Then pierce the tissue so that the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where the water will go.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then remove that and insert an instrument of this form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or ivory or lion leather, at the part that is lowest on it there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the tip of it is cut in the manner of a feather, as you can see.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the uppermost end of it is a ring, because when the instrument reaches the water, then you should immediately apply pressure on the instrument, thus evacuating only a small amount of water at once, for if you evacuate too much at once, the patient may die due to resolution of their vital spirit, or an accident may occur that brings about death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate that in accordance with the strength of the patient and according to what is indicated by the condition of the patient, the strength of their pulse, and their overall health.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Then remove the instrument, and close the wound with water, which is done because it is immediately retained by the wound that closes the holes on the tissue, as you are advised to pierce those in that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	After each operation, leave the instrument in for another day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small amount of water from them daily, and do this over several days with caution so that you do not exhaust their supply of water but only take a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you are concerned about the patient and allow a large amount of water to be removed, then bury them in fine sand up to their waist, and pour sweat-inducing substances over them for bathing, and have them expose themselves to the sun for long periods; and treat them with drying medicines until they are healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And apply cautery to the stomach, and treat the chest and abdomen after the removal of the water, as I have recounted in what has been mentioned previously.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 55.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children who are born with unopened passages for urine.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes a child is born from the mother's womb with the head of its urination not opened (or it is blocked or not in place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it is necessary to perform the operation of opening it as soon as the child is born using a finely crafted instrument according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then insert a fine lead needle into the obstruction and leave it there for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wishes to urinate, remove it and allow him to urinate; then return the instrument.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not insert the lead, it is possible that the urine, which needs to pass through that area, will not be able to flow.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	May the one whose wound is tight be treated with a lead nail, as we have said, for enough days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	May those in whom the wound is not in its place be treated as described, the cause of which is that one is born and the trauma is at the end of the urethra, so he cannot urinate properly; when elevating the penis with his hand above, it does not affect generation, since sperm cannot reach the major second rectitude, and this is a laghid illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the method of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, and you grasp the head of the penis with your left hand forcefully, and incise the tip of the foreskin with a sharp scalpel, like cutting a feather quill, or shave off some part so that the middle of the urethra appears as if it were the tip of the penis, and the wound falls in its proper place accordingly.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful during your operation to stop bleeding, as you may encounter this; pause the procedure when you cut into the blood vessel, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 56.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the condition known as balanitis, which occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and of its corruption, blackening, and adhesion to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Such occurrences often lead to this balanitis in the penis and it appears as a soft flesh prominence.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of these conditions is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	For benign conditions, suspend a fine ligature and then cut off the entire excrescence; and afterwards apply a poultice of Egyptian onion over it; and thereafter treat with myrtle decoction until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the tumor is malignant and of a threatening color, then you should administer cautery around the base of it and on its sides.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the tumor is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one part of the tumor is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove the part that is inside at the beginning until it is consolidated; and then treat the part that is outside, because when treating both parts simultaneously with the foreskin, there is no guarantee that it will not be injured.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if blackening and corruption occur in the genitals and foreskin, then you should excise all that is discolored and will likely corrupt or is already corrupted; and afterwards apply a bandage over it with honey, which has been mixed with ground and sifted rye bran and finely crushed iris roots.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And thereafter treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is bleeding, then administer lunar cautery according to this method:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because cautery is beneficial in two situations simultaneously: it helps with bleeding and also when the wound becomes corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed at that moment, then you should insert a lead cannula into the urethra so that the patient can urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in one whose foreskin is his, and upon whom circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to disease or abscess) it must be that you scrape with a blunt spatula so that the bandage dissolves and the head of the penis is released entirely.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to distinguish them delicately, then you must scrape with the spatula some part of the head of the penis and the foreskin, and this is because when the foreskin is fine, due to its fineness it can be pierced easily by its subtlety.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a very fine thread, which has already been wetted so that they do not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then treat with styptic wine so that it becomes consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVI.  
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the cleansing of children and the treatment of what happens during circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution of continuity as other illnesses are; but since it is part of our operation and our will, and because it specifically pertains to children, it is necessary that we assign the best method and the least harmful way for their safety.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they do not use it in their laws, and this is only because we have acquired knowledge through experience. The reason I have found is that most surgeons and barbers use a scalpel and scissors for circumcision and cleansing; they use a thread with a needle for suturing and a lancet for incisions.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already examined all these methods and did not find a better cleansing with scissors and thread than in cleansing with a lancet, because many times one avoids the danger above, as the skin of the foreskin has two layers, and what remains below is thin, and it is necessary for another incision and certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in the cleansing done by a surgeon's hand, which is manual, as used by barbers, the incision at the extremity of the male member is not secure, as it easily enters the groove there.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with a lancet, if you are careless, you may injure and corrupt your procedure.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and many times it happens in such a way that there is no need for cleansing, and I have seen that myself.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	Here is the translation into English:
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the method of the first operation is that you should make the child stand if it is one who understands a little, so that you should only tie the thread on his penis, and leave that for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make him happy in every way that is possible to him according to his understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make him stand between you in a prepared place, and do not let anyone else be there; and hide the scissors in your hand or keep them tied up, so that the child does not see them or any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then place your hand on his penis and blow on the cord, and pull it until the head of the penis is exposed, and then clean what has accumulated there from dirt.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then tie the marked place with a thread doubly, and then tie another thread a little lower down, and then hold your finger below the tied place tightly to indicate where the second ligature should be, and incise between the two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then raise the cord quickly and extract the head of the penis; and then let the blood flow slowly, for that is better; and sprinkle powder above it, and on top of the powder place a cloth in which is sprinkled mutton grease mixed with recently refined rose oil; and leave that upon it until another day; and treat it with care until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the scissors used for cleaning is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let one set of ends be blunt and the others sharp, so that the tip of the blade does not protrude, and let the length of both edges be equal to the length of two fingers equally.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in cleansing is that you force the coagulum entirely or partly out of what needs to be excised.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, stretch that part of your finger along the edge of the swelling and incise it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with forceps and incise it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed and the swelling remains below the groin in an abscess, then you should leave it until the abscess softens, and then incise it with ease, according to what is prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the head of the groin, for it should not be done on that part.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore, treat that with what the plague consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised beyond measure from the coagulum, and you follow the parts above, do not note that.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And therefore, treat that with what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LIVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or blood clots, or pus or flesh, and similar conditions as those we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and there is retention because of a stone which is in the neck of the bladder, then it must be that the patient is bent over his heels.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place the patient's feet on his buttocks and stretch out his abdomen from the part above his back, and have the patient pull his legs as much as is possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the neck of the bladder is forced to expel the stone towards the rear parts, so that the urine is relieved.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if the stone is not dissolved by the water we have mentioned and the cause is severe for the patient, then it must be that you administer extraction with an instrument called a siringua, which has this form: It should be made of silver and be thin like a quill, as fine as a reed pen about half a palm long, to which there should be a fine tube at its head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of testing the urine with that is that you take a thread doubled and tie it at the end of the wool or cloth for good binding; and insert the ends of the thread into the lower part of the siringua, and cut off any excess wool with scissors if necessary, then insert it forcefully into the tube. And then pull out the siringua gently and quickly.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And place the patient on the chair, and hold his bladder with oil for lubrication, using olive oil and rose water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the siringua gently until it reaches the end of the tube; and then bend the tube above the part where you are holding it; and then push the siringua inside until it reaches the bladder, and that tube must reach the patient's cause of obstruction, or else it will go to a place where there is tortuosity.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And slowly extract the bile with the wool little by little, for the urine dries the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And you should extract that and make a cure with urine, and use a tube; do not stop doing this and using the tube until the bladder is evacuated and relief from the pain is achieved.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Regarding the quality of enema for the bladder with an enema device and similar instruments, which are appropriate for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is ulceration or an abscess in the bladder, or clotted blood in it, or obstructed pus, and you want to administer liquids and medicines into it, then it should be done with an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	But at the end of it, there is a blunt tip, which is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And on that part, there are three grooves: two on one side, as you can see.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning, there is a concave part where it is inserted, and it should be according to the quantity that fills it, without addition, so that when any cause draws out the moisture, it can be drawn out, and when it is expelled, with it. If it is expelled far, then as the clampcedra has pitch applied to it in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to draw out moisture from the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the moisture, and pull with it the water that is pushed to the sides, for the moisture will be drawn into the concavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then insert the extremity of the bandage into the clamp as we have recommended in the circle; then press with the moisture that you apply, for that moisture will reach the bladder quickly, and the patient will feel it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the crucible is subtle with which the bladder is treated, and that is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or latobium, the head part more like small feathers, and below smooth like reed.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take a bladder made of leather, and place in it the moisture you want to treat in the bladder, then tie it tightly between two with strong binding, twice over, and heat that moisture above the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then insert the extremity of the crucible into the clamp.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then place your hand on the bladder with the moisture until it is structured properly, so that the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if a bladder is not available, then take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle; and pierce that throughout its entire roundness; then insert strong thread through those holes, both ways; then attach the circle as if it were sealed, so that you place in it what you want of moistures, oils, and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then tie that to the instrument as you did with the bladder, and press with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of stone removal.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already mentioned in the division the types of stone and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between a stone generated in the kidneys and one generated in the bladder, and the signs of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have discussed the stone in which such operations are performed, and its section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And thus narrating it with such exposition is clear and concise.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, I say that a stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and among its signs is that the urine excreted from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety but contains sand-like particles; and the patient scratches his genitals frequently, and feels pain during urination, and shortly after becomes relieved. And thus have I informed you of these matters.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is easier to treat children with that condition before they reach fourteen years of age; and the treatment is difficult for older individuals.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in young adults, it is somewhat easier because they are between those extremes.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And for the one in whom the stone is larger and the treatment more difficult; and if it is small, the opposite is true.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, to reach the treatment of this condition, we begin by cleansing the patient with a diet that excludes everything that causes stone formation; for such foods sometimes prevent the passage of the stone due to their nature.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Regarding this malady, apply pressure to the affected areas and use substances that cause vomiting so that the stone may descend into the bladder or jump from its place after a few attempts.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Apply that cauterization between the areas you have prepared, and let the substances be placed on the side opposite to them, so that the bladder is made to incline towards those parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Then examine that and all of the surrounding area.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	When you feel the stone in the space, cut it up immediately at that spot.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not find it immediately upon examination, then anoint your index finger with oil, using the left hand if the patient is a child, or the right hand if the patient is an adult, and insert it into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Examine for the stone with your finger inside.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gently guide it little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press on it with your finger and expel it outward towards the location of the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	Tell one assistant to press the bladder with their hand; and tell another assistant to extend the thighs outward with their right hand, and with their other hand to pull back the skin that is in front of the thighs, near the location of the incision.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then insert a probe that has this shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and make an incision between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle but slightly to the left side; ensure that the incision is over the stone and your finger is inside the anus, making a transverse cut so that the external part of the incision is wide and the internal part narrow according to how much of the stone you can reach, as much as possible without making it larger, since your finger in the anus will push the stone out easily after the incision.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there are some stones which have angles and edges, because of which it is difficult to polish them.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And there is one that resembles a lion's paw in shape, it is round, and it is easily polished.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Then place that one with angles and edges into the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not drilled in this way, now you should apply over that one, or press on that with a suitable gesture, the end of which should be like a file with which you press on the stone, and do not avoid it; or insert between them a delicate instrument with a curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot do that, now slightly move it a little and if you see blood flow, press on it with vinegar that has been triple strength.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if there is more than one stone, at the beginning you should press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise it slightly; and then move it a little closer to that; and similarly do so if they are in motion more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then ignorance would be to incise it in a large section, because this would lead to one of two bad outcomes: either death or that it results in continuous urine leakage, because the area has not fully healed.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer expulsion until it is removed, or devise the fracture of it with forceps so that you can extract it in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then when you have completed your operation, now fill the wound with pieces of aloe and dragon's blood, and press it firmly.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And pause over that cloth infused with oil and wine, or in rose oil and water, so that the abscess may yield.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then place the poultice on the affected part of the neck, and do not loosen the bandage within the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that bandage is removed, wash the area with water and some oil, and then treat it with a decoction of pennyroyal and a decoction of fenugreek until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound an abscess should occur, which is adhibited and corroded, and of that nature as if the blood is frozen in the bladder (and for this reason urine is prevented), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if left it will cause corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with vinegar acid, water and salt, and apply whatever is appropriate to the condition for its healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And throughout the entire healing process, you should apply both the treatments and adjust the medicines that are applied to the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and in the urethra, and is stuck there, and urine is prevented as a result, then treat it with what I recommend before resorting to section, because those treated by this method are rarely accused of needing section; and I know this, for you should take a fine steel probe, which has the following form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a triangular tip, sharp, and attached to a handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Take some oil, and lubricate the probe below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the instrument into the probe, piercing easily until the puncture reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the puncturing instrument with your hand on that stone little by little, and you will create a passage through which urine can flow from one side to the other; for the urine will be immediately released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then press your hand on what is broken off from the stone that has come out beyond the probe, for this piece will be shattered and expelled with the urine, and the illness will be cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some reason that prohibits it, then lubricate the area below the stone with oil and also above the stone with oil.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then place the probe on the stone between two bindings.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Then extract that [stone].
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then loosen the bandage and change the collected blood, which was gathered during the procedure.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to apply oil below the stone except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other bandage above unless, because when the oil near the swelling of the stone is removed, the pain returns to its place and the illness recurs.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary for you to apply oil above when you raise the swelling upwards or return to your previous position, and the illness will recur as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the Removal of Stones from Women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If a stone is found in any of these cases, the treatment is difficult and is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One reason for this is that women are more easily frightened.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	The second reason is that you do not find many women who are willing to disclose whether they have seen a doctor when chaste, or if they are married women.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third reason is that you do not find many women who are skilled in this art, especially the operation itself.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The fourth reason is that the location for incision to reach a stone in women is far from the location of the stone, which requires a deep incision, and this is feared.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	However, if necessity compels you to do this, then it is necessary for you to seek out an experienced female surgeon, but few are found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	However, if you do not have access to such a surgeon, then seek out a cautious and subtle doctor, or present a midwife who is knowledgeable about women's issues, or a woman skilled in this particular art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, present that person and command them to do everything you instruct, from the examination of the stone at the beginning; the reason for this is to check if the woman is frightened, and it is necessary that they insert their finger into her to locate the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if you find that one, cut it below the joint, and now order them to incise upon that one.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if it is not soft, now order the midwife to insert the joint into the patient's vagina and examine upon the stone, since she places her left hand on the bladder, and compress that one with good compression.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if you find that one, now proceed to gradually extract it from the opening of the bladder to the parts below as far as the summit of its strength until it reaches the root of the matter.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then incise upon that apposition at the midpoint of the vagina towards the root of the matter from whichever part it is to them appropriate, and place the stone in that part, and the said joint should not be cut below the stone.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that section, and if you feel the stone, now adjust the section according to the quantity which you know the stone will pass from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you should know that the types of stones are various: some are small and hard, some are sharp and rough, some are long and round, and some have edges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Then you should know how many types there are of them according to what you signify about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see blood flow, adjust the place with vitriol thrice and let it act on that for one hour until the blood is coagulated, and then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	Take care to prepare with you the instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of stones from men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see bleeding, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is incised, then sprinkle powder on the area and bind it with powders and a moderate bandage, and do not repeat this; and leave the stone and do not extract it, for the patient will likely die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the sharpness of the blood has subsided after some days, and the area has become clean, then return to your operation until the stone is dislodged.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of section on hernia immediately.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia aquosa is nothing but an aggregation of moisture in the white membrane below the tendon of the groin, which contains the bowel, and it is called a pouch.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And in some cases, it is in the proper fatty layer which nature has prepared for the bowel to pass through, so that it appears as if another bowel is present; and it is the tendon of the groin between the white membrane we have mentioned, and this is not the case quickly.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the groin muscles, because this substance accumulates there, and sometimes it happens due to impact on the groin.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture can have various colors, as its color may lean towards citrine or blood-red, or reddish, or be black and foul, or be watery and white, and the latter is better.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	Here are the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water such as this one is: for if it is in the white membrane which we have mentioned, then at that moment the boil is round and leaning a little in length like the figure of an egg, and the root appears, because the moisture contains it on all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper subcutaneous tissue, then the boil is round like half of an egg, and for this reason one estimates that it is another kind of egg.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the root of the boil and the white membrane, then press below the center.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then observe the color of the moisture in the boil at its deepest part; and according to what is seen in the traces of the deep part, judge about what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	When we come to the treatment of it with iron, then it is necessary to command the patient to be bloodletted if that is possible for you, and open the body of the boil.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And let him lie supine on his back on some raised surface, and place below the wound some dry cloths.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit you on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand on his right side, who shall extend his finger from one of the two sides to the root of the boil and to the part near the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a broad spatula and divide the root of the boil at the middle location along its length near the penultimate joint.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And let the section be made according to the rule equally distant from the line which should follow the hair of the armpit, until it reaches the white fold.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And scrape that area, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not cut it; and your scraping of the place which you are scraping should be such that it is suspended more and delicately examine the scraping according to the quantity possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the fold full of water with a wide incision, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two lips of the section with forceps, and extend the fold in both directions; and do not touch the lymph nodes under the armpit, and incise the fold in that manner as is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut that area entirely or in pieces, and especially its inner part finely, for if you do not examine the incision carefully, there is no guarantee that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the procedure proceeds from that point away from its lymph node during the time of your operation, after you have completed the section of the fold, return inside it, and then adjust the two lips of the armpit lymph node with sutures, and then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the area corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary for you to ligate the vessels which are above the suspensory ligament, and remove the area, and then treat it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is accumulated in two separate parts, then you will know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part as you did with the other equally; and if it appears to you to be an operation, then you should perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	After you have wiped away the blood, insert wool submerged in oil or rose oil into the sections; then place another piece of wool that has been soaked in vinegar and oil over both sides of the genitals and the abdomen; cover this with folded cloths and poultices, and bind all these together using a bandage as follows:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Then take two cloths and fill them with crumpled wool according to this pattern; make the edges so that they are pressed by wood or wetted wool, and attach them to the structure in the breeches belt, one end of which reaches into the buttocks, the other at the groin, and two ends on each thigh, and all parts should be tightly fastened to the breeches belt.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	In some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of surgery with a knife; you should take a thin lancet-shaped cautery and insert it at the root of the genitals, ignite it as we have recommended until the white substance containing the liquid becomes visible, and then use a cautery in the following shape:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is shaped like the Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Then pierce that substance, and ignite it until all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then extend the substance with hooks and scrape it with the hooks, and scrape it with a thin ignited cautery; and cut it as much as you can until all of it is removed; be careful that your hand is not burned by the fire.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this procedure is safer and more distant from blood loss compared to surgical cutting, and better than the operation with a knife.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If there is an abscess or phlegmon opposite the site of section or cautery, or if there is bleeding, then treat it according to what is contrary to it; and follow the treatment as has been described.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the patient is too weak for a second operation due to its horror, then administer puncture as I recommend; and you should be certain, from what we have said about the signs, that the hernia is fluid-filled.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Now you should have the patient sit on some raised support, and then puncture the abscess at its lowest part near the pubic area, and place the puncture according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the incision be wide enough for all the fluid to drain out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then place over the area a bandage and tie it down so that any remaining fluid can drain out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat it until the condition is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if the condition is contrary to the evacuation of fluid at that time when you puncture it: and this is not done except because the white membrane in the orifice of the abscess resists and prevents the efflux of fluid; then place in the abscess a decoction or instrument with which water is extracted from hydropic conditions, as described earlier; or apply pressure to the area around the abscess gently.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the fluid may return after about six months or around that time; and when it does, then puncture it again in the same manner, for the patient will thus spend fewer days suffering.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter Sixty-Three.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the Incision for a Flesh Hernia and Its Treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the incision for this hernia, there is great fear of danger in the major dispositions; therefore, it seems better to me to abandon the procedure and save the patient by another method.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am recalling the operation in that case and the specifics of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses occur in those parts where the genitalia are situated, and this happens for various reasons: either due to acute, sharp superfluity which is discharged into the genitalia, or due to impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the skin, and there is no relief from the pain, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And quickly it becomes a stone-like abscess, the color of which is dark, and there is no improvement in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by the entanglement of arteries, and by the inflammation of those parts as has already been perceived in the recall of it, or by the inflation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But what is caused by the inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers, and it does not need to be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But the one that is caused by the inflammation of a vein does not disperse because of compression with the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that incision may be made over this type and over other tissues; you should incise the skin of the genitalia, and nearby there are parts above, and extract the white mucus, and free the suspensory ligaments, and tie them, and incise the suspensory ligaments after you have freed it from all sides of the parts.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Then if the wound has become consolidated in those flesh areas, now is the time for you to extract that and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adherence between any part of the cavity or between what is between the vessels, now is the time for you to release all that adherence and incise it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is a growth of flesh in the location of the adherence that is behind, now is the time for you to incise all that which is there, and extract the wound as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then when your operation is complete, now fill the wound with wool infused in olive oil and wine; and subsequently care for it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernias that involve the intestines.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vit is an abscess enveloped by some covering similar to a boil on the softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult movement, exercise, and walking due to the ailment.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, it is out of fear of what precedes recovery that caution is exercised.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, it is necessary to describe the operation as it was performed initially.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And say that the patient should sit on a high stool; then press the suspensory ligaments of the testicles downward; and afterward grasp the groin area with your hands on both sides of the veins that you feel near the penis; and have another assistant hold the opposite side firmly, stretching it vigorously.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Thus, incise along the side with a narrow and sharp cut across in the region where the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then remove completely as we have said in the extraction of arteries, which is usually done on the flanks.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place a needle with doubled fine thread in it, and tie one end at the beginning of the places where you have made incisions, and tie the other end at the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then incise those in the middle part with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated from the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then treat the wound as you would treat other wounds where you wish healing to occur, so that the vessels which nourish one of two genders are not affected, for it is not harmful by doing so.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if you have made incisions in all the vessels, then it is necessary to remove the testicles or for the testicles to be deprived of nourishment through the cutting of the vessels, so that they are completely starved and destroyed, or for them to cease receiving any benefit from these.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that occurs when the cipha (abdominal wall) is extended over the stomach from the angles at the sides of the navel, causing some of the bowels to protrude through that rupture.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This is the rupture of the hip or dislocation of it, and these two types occur for various reasons: by blow, by jump, by shout, by lifting some heavy object, or by similar causes.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this, when it is by extension of the hip, is that it happens gradually over a long period of time, and does not happen suddenly, and it is an abscess equal within the area where the hip presses on the gut.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The sign of it is when it is by section of the hip, for at the beginning it causes sudden severe pain; and it is an abscess different from the usual one near the joint, and this is due to the injury of the gut, and the body part is affected beyond the hip.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestine is protruded outside with the membrane, and this is called an intestinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by gas, and sometimes there is a tear in the intestine through which it passes, and here it is trapped, and this causes great pain to the patient, and sometimes it leads to severe pain, especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of these types of this illness with iron there is fear, for it is necessary to avoid using it in such cases.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of the operation for this is that you command the patient to push back the intestine with their hand into the parts inside their abdomen if it obeys its return, and then place him lying on his back between your hands, and lift his thighs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then press the joint where the scrotal hernia is located in the upper parts, and incise the scrotum completely along its length; and then insert hooks into both sides of the incision as needed to open it.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if you make the incision according to the quantity that it is possible for the flesh to heal.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then carefully shave that area where the cord of the testicles is, until the hard white ridge of each part is exposed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Now insert your finger into the place where the testicle is, between the white ridge, which is above the cord of the flesh, and between the next ridge, and separate any adhesions that are in the part behind the flesh.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then carefully move the cord of the testicles away from the areas behind, and with this extend the white ridge with your left hand, and raise the flesh along the ridge to the area of the incision; and instruct the assistant to lift the flesh upwards as you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And feel with your fingers to ensure that there is no cause for concern with the bowel wrapped around the hard white ridge.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause for concern, then你现在可以继续翻译剩余的部分，还是需要我帮忙处理其他内容？如果有更多部分需要翻译，请提供具体文本。
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle with seven fine threads, and insert it through the back of the ridge, which is below the cord of the testicles where the incision lies; and then cut off the protruding ends so that only four threads remain, and then tie them in some figure resembling a cross; and bind those threads to the ridge we mentioned above the cord of the testicles with a strong knot on both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Here are the extremities of the veins, wrap them tightly with a bandage so that some of the vessels that nourish these cannot transmit any cause from which an abscess might result.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And pause again at a third of the distance from the first bandage; then between these two bandages leave an area above the navel, which is below the scrotum, in the size of the breadth of a finger, and incise the rest according to roundness, and remove it.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And there incise in the part below the scrotum, from which section blood and pus will flow as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound; and bandage it as we have recommended (and occasionally cauterize the white area, which we mentioned near the incision to prevent blood flow, for several times this happens); and leave the bandage on so that it does not fall off.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the dressing of it is delayed, then hot water should be applied, and bandage it so that it does not fall off as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with the usual methods for treating wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter Sixty-Six.
De hernia ventosa.	On Ventral Hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this type of hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has dared to treat it with surgery.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the earlier ones said that it should be treated as we have recommended for the hernia that is on the other side; which is to ligature the veins near the section with ease; and then dry it in a suitable place around the abscess that opens it, until the veins fall off.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	Regarding the treatment of wounds as we have said, it must be cured.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	About the division that is made in the glands.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	In some cases, there is a rupture in the glands as we have said, and one must examine the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And they do not assign any cause for the pouch to the genitalia; and even if they do assign one, it is rare; and it returns in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged with this condition, a fissure is adjusted in the sphincter where the pouch descends into the sphincter; and this happens due to the extension of the sphincter which is in the glands as we have said, and because the cause is that the sphincter is stretched out, it becomes softened, and there is an accumulation and one must examine it.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment for this is with cauterization as was preceded in the narration of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And in some cases, it is treated with iron according to this method: the patient lies on their back between the thighs, and then the area of the rupture of the abscesses is dried by cutting across the width according to the quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then stretch the white sphincter that is below the groin until it is exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the cautery and place it on the prominent part of the sphincter, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then mark the two prominent points on either side of the cautery at the extremity of the sphincter, and suture one to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	From this extract take the extremity of the vein, and do not insert it from the suture completely, nor extend the hook, nor any other cause such as I will make you know in the treatment of an intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And in this way treat it as you would with the treatment of wounds, and when you insert the sutures, clean that area and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the suture is tight and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place, for it is closer to healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter .lxviii.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the cord of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In many cases, the cord of the testicles is softened in some men because the flesh that lies within it is softened, and this requires careful attention.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for the one who is treating this condition to have the patient lie according to his side, and insert all of the cord that is softened over the natural cord; and then adjust both edges with the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, cut the excess of the softened cord at three or four places and with a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then insert the sutures between the incisions; and then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed and the stitches fall out.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter .lxix.
De castracio.	On Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but because it is read to me that I should remember it in this book; and the remembrance of it is not necessary except for two ways, one of which is so that when someone is asked about it by a patient who needs treatment, the doctor knows how to treat it; and the other way is that we sometimes have need of castration for certain animals for our benefit from them, such as horses, oxen, and pigs, and similar beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by cutting, or by making an incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in the one that is performed by cutting, the way of the operation is that we should bathe the animal in warm water until the testicles become softened and descend.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those [testicles] with your hand until they are loose and do not appear to be attached underneath.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration performed by making an incision and cutting, make sure you hold the animal and press the scrotum of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then lift the suspensory tissues, and make an incision on each side so that you proceed with two cuts.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then make an incision on those parts that you have each separated.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any part of the cord attached, but rather the fine cord that is above the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better than the one performed by cutting, because cutting may leave some part of the testicles attached, causing the animal to desire mating.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	About the treatment of the ulcer inside until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphrodism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is of two kinds: the first appears where there is a space between the testicles, and in that place where it should be male hair, there is instead a female feature.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And in some cases, that part where urine is discharged is located between the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, there is another kind: the female organ above the pubis appears as two testicles of a man slightly to one side and somewhat like the scrotum of a man, with two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	It is that you should incise those tight tissues until the pus or bad fluid is evacuated, and then treat them as you would other ulcers.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind of men, where urine is discharged from the part between the testicles, there is no treatment or surgery for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On the treatment of protrusions and elevated flesh due to causes in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	A mild protrusion that is naturally tight should be treated until it becomes less tense and manageable; in some cases, it may become enlarged in women to such an extent that it protrudes similarly to men and interferes during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then cover with lint the surplus of the wound on your hand or inch and incisions.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not bandage an incision too tightly, especially near the root of the razor cut, so that blood does not flow out.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And properly care for that during the healing of the wounds so that it may be healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Matured flesh is the flesh that grows in the hollow of the wound until it fills it, and then it spreads to the surrounding areas like a tail (and thus some call this "tail illness"); therefore, we should incise it as we would lint, and care for it until it heals.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	On the Treatment of Wound Inflammation.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Wound inflammation is when the hymen of a woman has not been penetrated, or when the opening is small.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	It is accidental due to a previous illness, and this occurs either because the flesh was not properly joined or due to a thick or thin scar.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it occurs either at the root of the wound, or on its sides, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part, and you must prohibit cooking, intercourse, and childbirth, and rather easily also menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the diagnosis of this condition is made by examination with a speculum, if the closure is apparent; but if it is not apparent, then you should seek it out using your fingers or a probe.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If there is an obstruction due to a small cicatrix and it is near the two lips, then you should cut it and disrupt that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And when you place sponges over the two lips, then apply the bandages that are closest to each other.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And let the woman lie on her back, with her thighs spread apart, and then pull the two lips forcefully so that the small cicatrix is cut and the obstruction is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and soak it in oil and place that on the area, and have a man guard it for several days until the incised area is healed.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the cicatrix is thick and hard, then you should cut that with a scalpel or with a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to a piece of flesh, then suspend that for a moment, and incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And have with you the medicines that stop bleeding without causing inflammation, such as acetum, dragon's blood, and hens' eggs, prepared with raw egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide lead tube so that the wound does not heal too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep that for several days and administer dry lint.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then proceed with the other treatment for healing until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And in some cases, other tissues may need to be incised according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If this is due to an abscess that causes pain, do not apply anything contrary to the abscess in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids and similar conditions that occur in the genital area of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are an inflammation of the veins' openings inside, from which blood flows continuously; and when these old hemorrhoids become hard and form lumps.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And now I have described the types of those and the signs of them, and to say which of them can be cured and which cannot be cured.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and lumps when they are in the upper part of the body and do not appear to the senses, in those cases no treatment should be applied.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	However, those that occur at the openings of the lower part of the body where sensation can be felt are the ones that can be treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary that you place the woman in a suitable position and gently extend the affected area with forceps or a rough cloth, and then cut them with scissors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle on those areas substances that promote the flow of blood from powders such as incised ones like acacia and similar ones.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then compress the area with a pad for one hour, and afterwards soak it in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood continues, then have the area soaked in a decoction of sumac and citrus peels and pomegranate rinds and similar substances.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Take flour of oats and compound it with honey and vinegar and make a plaster with that water upon the back of it.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is clotted, it is good; but if not, apply to both sides with poultices, and on the nipples without scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take wool and soak it in the juice of coriander or the juice of lily of valley or the juice of wild garlic with vinegar, and apply it to the place; and then treat the area with ointments until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May you mix what is needed carefully, so that you compound this according to what has been said by me in the ointment recipe.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the puncturing of the bladder in cases of acute retention of urine.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various kinds of abscesses occur in the groin, such as boils and stone-like abscesses and ulcerous ones and hemorrhoidal and erysipelatous and phlegmonous and fistulous and hemorrhoids and piles and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already mentioned these diseases and the kinds of them and the signs of them, and their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And I say in this treatise about the abscess that occurs in the groin when it is one of those that need to be treated surgically, and if you want to know how the operation is performed with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and if there is redness in that area and if it feels hot when touched, then do not proceed with puncturing it, and treat it with what aids maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms subsides.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	During the time when you are to perform circumcision on a woman, place her on a chair that has two seats; and recline her on her backside and adjust her feet towards the part farther down from the belly, and spread out her thighs, and position her arms above her head, and tie some of them with bandages as is appropriate.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And let the midwife follow from the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the birth canal is made, the form of which will be described in those cases that will be mentioned.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this instrument, place it at the center of the opening of the birth canal of the woman, and what is inserted from the instrument into the birth canal should not exceed its natural orifice and lead to injury.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the orifice of the birth canal, now it should be that you place cushions over the tissue around the orifice so that the entry of any instrument into the orifice of the birth canal is prevented.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And it should be that you place the spiral that runs along the instrument on the side below, and let the midwife hold the instrument and rotate the spiral until the opening of the birth canal is dilated.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the area becomes visible and is touched with the hand and feels soft, now it should be that you dry that place with a dry cloth.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the blood is evacuated, now it should be that you place on the wound a piece of cloth submerged in rose oil or green oil, which has some astringent properties; and place a bandage over the area around the orifice of the birth canal.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Take a piece of clean cloth and place it over the wound after soaking it in water in which mallows have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And it should be treated properly for about two days until the patient feels well enough for this treatment, at which point it is safe to proceed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the wound and the swelling are washed with this, so that it is cleansed with water and honey, and then with water in which fennel seeds or long-leaved artemisia have been boiled, after which the patient returns to treatment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the swelling is deep within the wound, it is now necessary to abstain from treating it with iron, instead caring for it as we have described in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to treat male embryos in a way that avoids abnormal development, according to the figure that is not natural.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary for the midwife to know at the beginning the figure of normal childbirth by signs of it; and it is that when you see a woman press herself towards the parts below and desire to breathe fresh air, and she becomes joyful about what will be born from her, and quickly senses the movement of the fetus, then you know that this birth will be according to natural form, and it is the emergence of its head first, and the second part suspended or hanging from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those signs, it is necessary to compress the abdomen gently so that the fetus descends gradually, and when its head emerges, the second part follows, and this should be cleaned of any excess with proper cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	He who lies on another part is unnatural and not commendable, for when the drunkard is thrown upon his back and his body lies before his head and his feet behind, or one hand or foot forward, or his head and hand at the side and his belly exposed, and he turns lightly upon his side, and in semblance of such figures are those not commendable.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all such matters and to guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And there he shows all the figures of those things, and which part is injured in those cases, as it is signified by that and stands upon that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the act is performed upon his own head by natural effort, and it is vehement for the woman and difficult at that part, and sometimes her virtue already weakened, then let him do such a thing or women have it, and evaporate the essence of fenugreek boiled with warm oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then the midwife should insert her little finger and divide it with the second one, or dry it with her nail until she draws out what is inside of moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly so that the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not descend, then it is necessary that the woman be cleansed with powder of silk and powder of fenugreek mixed together.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command him, after the cleansing, to be bound and make him sneeze with certain conditions; and at his mouth and nose for one hour, because the fetus will soon be expelled.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both legs of the patient are fractured at the beginning, then you should gradually reduce them to ease.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	And if the instrument is not obeyed, then place the woman on a cushion and lift her off it, and then lower the cushion to the ground; and hold the woman so that she does not fall due to the lowering.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the bones are not returned to their proper place and the patient dies, then incise them and remove the contents of the body or tie the body with a cloth and extract it evenly, for it will be fractured.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	And thus remove the embryo from its position.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the patient is on their back, then you should push them upwards, and then gently turn the patient, and then even out their position, and then take one part of it and gradually extend it.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when it has been introduced into the things, then you command them to sneeze, and make that person sneeze under certain conditions, for it will be fractured if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not fractured as we have recommended, then you return the patient gradually until you place them in their natural position, for it will then be fractured easily and appropriately.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited by all that we have recommended, then take musellage of hart's flesh and dissolved gum, and pound them together well in the mortar, and then apply this mixture to the woman’s groin, at the base of her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And having placed the razor in cold water, until it affects the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the upper parts of the body are inflamed, then apply the smoke of myrtle and let it act on them.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the smoke treatment lasts for an hour, then place a razor on a comb, and afterward make the patient sneeze and open their mouth wide, and remove it, and press the lower part of the abdomen lightly, because the result will be expelled soon after.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	And collect the expelled matter on their teeth and hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the matter is expelled in this manner, then gently place their small hand inside; and afterward have the woman lie with her head on his shoulder, and his feet raised, and they should sit on the bed, and complete the treatment of their hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then gently press on the abdomen of the patient little by little, and afterward extract what is near their feet from behind the ears until it is prepared in the upper part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the matter is not expelled, then take his feet and move them vigorously, and afterward gently press what is on the hypochondria little by little until the matter can be released from the upper parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then gently insert their hands and guide the matter little by little, and instruct the woman to strain herself until the matter is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	And collect the expelled matter along the lateral side with one of their hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Here is the translation:
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if it cannot be done, then place it on the bed and crush the substances with strong pounding, and afterwards apply plasters which I have recommended made of mucilaginous substances.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the time of childbirth has come, then make her sit on it, and afterwards study the reduction of the hand, and restore the fetus according to its natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command him to compress himself inward so that he may be expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Examine the fetus on its back, extending its limbs and wrap it with bandages, starting from both sides of its larger part.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Let the midwife hold the hand of the fetus and then gently turn it little by little, so that its delivery is facilitated.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is done and the proper time has passed, then place on the wound the preparation we have recommended of oil and mucilaginous substances.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command him to hold back little by little, and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair and command her to lean over the right side, and then command him to compress himself; and make her sneeze under certain conditions.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The exit of the prepared fetus on its side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you decide on the incision of the larger part according to this method, consider it carefully, and then you make an incision with your fingernail so that it is evacuated of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of it, then you make an incision in the abdomen, so that it is not retained and dies.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Here is the translation:
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The outcome of twins or multiple offspring.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are born rarely, and sometimes three or four [are born], but this is strange and happens seldom; yet these causes are due to nature, not the mother.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And among them, whether there are many or few, a second birth occurs, and they are separated by the navel string. They distinguish each of these entirely through the umbilical cord attached to each one. And sometimes it happens naturally quickly as if it were one fetus, while at other times it does not occur in such a praiseworthy manner as we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some of them have difficulties during childbirth and reach the state we described regarding unnatural figures, then you should care for them as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does what is appropriate with both ease and skill, whether early or late, and acts according to every figure as it is prepared for the birth, aiming at health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	A reminder of what is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarried.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes they are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and sometimes ten. It is worth noting that a woman miscarries after six months, while another carries to full term, and this cause has been established by the measurements of the wise scholars.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this must be known by the midwife as it is very important for her to recognize these signs correctly, and thus she can act appropriately in what is necessary.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the Extraction of a Dead Fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat a dead fetus as we have said in the division of treatment and it is not expelled, and you are forced to use surgical intervention at this point, then you must consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and not subject to any of the conditions for which her safety is feared.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	At this point, the woman should be placed on her back on the bed with her buttocks raised and her head lowered.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The attendant should hold both of her legs or tie her to the bed so that her body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you should moisten the mouth of the mother with oils and honey, and with a mixture of flax, fenugreek, and linseed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and honey, and then gently insert her hand into the mother, and then search with her hand for the place where the hooks can be placed in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And the appropriate places for this are as follows: then you should consider whether the fetus is positioned so that it will descend head first, and now you place the hooks in its hands, or around its neck, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or under its chin, or at the base of its throat, or in the proper areas of its back, or near its hips.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the descent is foot first, then in the buttocks, or in the middle of its back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	Take the needle with your right hand and place its curve at that point which is between the fingers of your left hand, and insert it into one of those places we have mentioned, until it reaches the diseased area.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and insert another needle next to it, or a third if necessary, so that the traction is equal, and not an extension according to its straightness alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And do this to all parts, so that the extraction of it is eased just as it is done with the teeth during their extraction.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is necessary in the place where the extension should be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then it is necessary for the midwife to anoint some of the things mentioned with oil and insert them carefully and turn what is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if a part of the fetus is dislodged, then the needles should be moved to the place where it is easier; and do this until the entire fetus is delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is dislocated in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to its contraction, then a bandage should be wrapped around it; and afterward, extract it until it is completely out, and cut it either at the joint of the hand or at the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do the same for the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the fetus's head is large, or if it causes contraction during delivery, or if it is in the tightly fitting part of the water bag, then you should insert between the fingers and cut open the head to drain the water, or use an instrument called “alundat,” the shape of which will be among the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And it should be done as if it were being done to a large-headed person by nature: and now it is necessary either to cut that thing which is bound, or to take away that thing which must be removed as we have said; and then extract from the bones with the forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is raised and is compressed by the clavicle, then it should be split so that the moisture which is in the sinews may be effused.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated and does not rise excessively, then you should cut the head immediately as much as is possible for you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the lower part of the abdomen is diseased or is in a state of hydrops, then it is necessary for you to puncture that place where the moisture circulates within.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the condition is above the pubis, then the attraction of it is distant and the direction of it towards the mouth of the urethra is also distant.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is compressed by the abdomen and the muscles, then it is necessary for you to extract that cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and to cut open the abdomen and the muscles so that the fluid that is within can flow out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members remain stationary and only the head turns, then place your left hand between them; but if the mouth of the urethra is open, then insert your hand into the prepuce, and search for the head there, and pull it together with those mentioned into the mouth of the urethra, and then insert one or two fingers, and pull it with these.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the urethra is compressed by an abscess that occurs at it, then it should not be irritated further; instead, you should administer effusions of moist and fatty substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Apply plasters; and follow with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the condition is on the side of the patient, then as is possible, prick there; and administer the water that we have mentioned in the case of a live wound.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then cut it into pieces and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And make sure that you do not leave any cause for the second condition.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your entire operation, then administer what we have mentioned about the treatment for abscesses similar to those that occurred previously.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs, then proceed with astringent waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman in whose abdomen there was a dead fetus, and above that focus another pregnancy occurred, and above the other focus the fetus is also dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to someone who had an abscess near their navel for a long time; it became swollen and internally filled with pus, and began to emit pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to treat them, and treated them for a long time, but the condition did not improve.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied some causes of strong attraction to them in the form of plasters, and extracted one bone from them, and after a few days, another bone; and I was very surprised, as there were no bones in the abdomen.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Thus, when examining the wound, remove the bones that are present in its various positions, and if you have seen it in such a manner for some time, correct it with a small force.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And do not be surprised if it seems strange, for in this lies the science and assistance to what the skilled physician uses his hand for in administering treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of a spiral in which the mother is operated:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a clamp in which it equalizes the leaves, to this clamping there are two spirals at the ends of two arms.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this spiral should be finer than a needle and should be made of copper or the wood of trees.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each arm should be two fingers, and the margin of each at both ends should be one finger, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle of the two arms there are two adjustments made of that same wood, which are fixed, their length being half a palm plus a bit more, and the width of each is two fingers or slightly more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two attachments should be inserted into the mouth of the mother so that they are used when you rotate the two prescribed spirals.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another similar form, finer and more lightweight:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It should be made of copper or wood, resembling the form of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the extremity of the bone to which it is added, make an addition as many times as necessary, and the length of each such addition is about one palm, and the width of each is two of these.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open any of them, then you should have the woman lie on her back with her legs hanging down, because that is how the parts are positioned.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument as you would with scissors, proportionally according to the quantity you want from the size of the opening of the womb until the sounder does what you wish.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of dizziness which the ancients described:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of an impulse with which the fetus is pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of association in which the large head is contained:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps, at the end of which there are teeth as many times as necessary, and some versions are made long like forceps according to this form, as many times as necessary, with teeth like those of a comb in which the head is grasped and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of association for few:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of one having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of one having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps in which the teeth on one side grasp and contain the head of the fetus:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a spatum having two ends with which the head is divided:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	With those instruments so exercised, and when the various kinds of them are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, it becomes easier for their operation and better for serving people according to their needs.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you should prepare whatever is needed from those instruments, for the necessity of them cannot be excused.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of the extraction of the second [incision or procedure].
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second birth is retained during childbirth, you should instruct the patient to hold their breath, and then make them sneeze under certain conditions. Place your hand over the mouth and nose of the patient, and if it comes out this way, it is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a hollow object and pierce it through the cover, placing it over the mouth of the mother with herbs such as chamomile, rue, anise, camomilla, Arabian saffron, cinnamon, and sage.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All of these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the hollow object, and place it over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a reed tube in the mouth of the mother, and hold it there so that the vapor reaches the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make her sneeze as we have said, and the second birth will be quickly expelled.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this treatment does not work immediately and it is not expelled, then instruct the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or masticated elderflower, and insert it into the womb and search for the second birth with it. When you find it, take it out gradually piece by piece. If it is attached to the placenta of the mother, then insert her hand as we have recommended, and when she finds the second birth, extract it little by little according to what is appropriate so that the mother does not suffer from excessive attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Take care that it is turned to the right and left with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And it should be adjusted in the amount of attraction, for it will obey and avoid adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed, we have already recommended treatment through sneezing and medication of the wound with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not expelled by all the causes we have recommended, then guard against overworking it through repeated attempts at extraction. Instead, what emerges from her to the mouth of the mother should be connected to the woman’s body part, and subsequently treated with cautery and tetrapharmaca; for that will allow it to purge itself gradually over several days and will dissolve and be expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it purges, it raises harmful vapors to the head and stomach, and this aggravates the illness; therefore, it is necessary to administer sublimations and appropriate treatments for that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients already used sublimation of natrtle and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of an instrument with which a woman is subjected to sublimation due to the retention of menstruation and during her second period:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of wood or metal.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the narrow end should be placed in the vagina and the wider end over the fire, and the sublimation should be placed among the coals of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep that instrument inside until the sublimation is consumed and then repeat with another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of the treatment of the unopened anus of a child.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many children are born with their anuses not open, which are small and closed.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then it is necessary for the midwife to carefully open the mentioned orifice with her finger; and if she cannot do so, she should use a sharp probe to make an opening, being careful not to injure the rectum.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then apply a poultice made of boiled wool soaked in wine and oil; and afterwards, treat the opening until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it is obstructed, then place a small tube inside for several days, and remove it when the child needs to pass gas.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it also happens that the anus becomes obstructed due to the hardening of an abscess or swelling; then it is necessary to incise that hardness, and afterwards treat it as we have said regarding treatment and lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of the treatment of fistulas that occur below.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that occur in the lower part near the anus are often hard and thick, which appear close to the anus or in the area nearby.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is one fistula or multiple.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And as that hardness subsides and discharges watery or slightly purulent fluid, and in some cases these fistulas penetrate deeper.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate deeper are known by what is discharged from them during evacuation and by gas formation; and sometimes the discharge indicates a poor outcome, and it is easily discernible whether these conditions will be severe.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	Of those fistulas, some extend into the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the shaft of the penis; and similarly, some penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the root of the bone.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in that which is known as a penetrating fistula into the anus and a non-penetrating one, it is that you insert your finger into the anus, and introduce a fine probe of horn or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is tortuosity in that area, then introduce a fine probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel any of this nor find any cause for evacuation such as worms or flatulence, as we have said, then you know that it is non-penetrating, and at this point you can proceed with the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the shaft of the penis, then the treatment involves draining the urine from that area and prohibiting anything that would hinder the healing process, so that the affected site may be consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circumference, then the indication is that the probe passes easily here if there is no tortuosity within the bone, and causes pain in the circumference of the affected area; and you will have a persistent fever; and nothing works in this treatment, nor does it heal without difficulty.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the treatment of these involves the labor and futility of physicians, upon which such treatments rely.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing without instruments is hoped for as I will tell you, and this is what I and my predecessors have done.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back and raises the flanks up from him, the things being inclined towards his belly, and then insert a probe of lead or iron if it is in the fistula tortuosity, until you know the place where the probe passes.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if it is around the anus that the patient feels pain, then you should insert your finger into the anus there.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel with your finger that the probe has already begun to penetrate on its own, then what you feel between your finger and the sphincter or flesh, you will certainly know that it is penetrating; and then do not work on it, for there is no healing in that, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some might say that it heals in some men slowly.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the treatment in which help is hoped for, you should ignite a cautery subtly according to the size of the fistula, as was described earlier, and insert that burning object into the fistula until it goes around the anus; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those inflamed tissues around the fistula are now constricted like the quill of a bird.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then treat that with bandages wrapped in butter until all those constricted tissues heal, and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh. If it heals, that is good; but if not, then it will not heal at any time by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters and does not penetrate inside, say to which part it reaches in the backside; between that and the probe there is a thin layer of flesh or cicatrix, and sometimes the fistula is situated on what appears as the surface of the buttock. At this time, the area from the beginning of the fistula dries up, and you see drying along with the probe, until the drying reaches the place where the end of the probe penetrates, and through the probe it is freed and cured.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then cleanse those flesh areas affected by the fistula, which are similar to the tube of a bird's feather quill, without breaking any of them for lack of cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if blood flows out when you are operating on those flesh areas, at that time the skillful thing to do and the proper instrument is to cauterize with fire or with sharp medicine, for cauterizing with fire adjusts two good habits: it tightens the adjusted flesh areas and stops the bleeding by drying up the moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then treat that with cloths wrapped in butter or in three layers of cloth until the place heals, and afterwards cure the wound with hard flesh remedies which generate and consolidate.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And medicines that have the property of being styptic and drying; when these are restored, it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has penetrated inside the anus and is extended from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore, if you feel the probe and between it and your finger there is a thin layer of cicatrix or flesh, and it is close to penetration, then at this point there is no operation to be performed except by faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to treat it in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry it until you achieve the condition where it is possible for you to introduce some suitable remedy and proper treatment; and do not delay with drying because doing so could damage the rectum containing the bowel, and act upon the patient thusly without their will; and then cure that which we have mentioned as being light to heal; or extend that membrane and clean that pus which you dried inside towards the anus, as we have said, either by hand or by another sharp instrument, and then purify those ulcerated tissues which are visible during drying due to perforation; and then strive to restore the entire wound through drying, and if the upper pus openings do not heal, and the fistula remains in the part of the anus, it will be easier for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you introduce the probe into the fistula, and it is in the crack of the anus around the surface of the body with the cord and at the edge of the anus, then take a perforated tip, which is like a needle for preparing the cores in this way:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert it into the affected area wrapped in five leaves or around them; and then insert the probe with the medicine into the fistula until you achieve the desired condition.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates the edge of the anus towards the inside, then you extract the medicine from that route as if you were inserting your finger into the anus; and remove the tip of the medicine and bind both ends securely, and leave it there for one or two days, and when you incise the medicine in the flesh, carefully do so inside where those tissues are between the two ends of the medicine and which connect.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Regarding the treatment of the wound, until it is healed and strengthened.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the openings of the fistula are not penetrable, now make them penetrable in whatever way you have prepared, but do not force it into the preon, for you must not do this so as not to injure the rectum; and then proceed with that until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatum with spikes with which the fistula is incised: its curvature should be sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, so that you do not injure what is unnecessary, as often happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Regarding the stitching of hemorrhoids in which pus flows during the incision of those areas.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids occur in two ways: either they appear around the anus resembling coal lumps, or they are like grape clusters.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And there are small and large ones among them, and the pus flows from these constantly and is one continuous flow, and they appear both inside and outside the anus, and at its extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that appear outside the anus are due to less moisture, from which clear water or a little blood mixed continuously flows, and this depends on the color of the skin.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit in such a way that the anus opens and the hemorrhoids become visible to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you should cover your hands and use hooks or what you have to grasp them with your nails, and then cut those [hemorrhoids] along their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the hooks do not hold in those places because of their moisture and softness, then take a rough cloth or a cork or a flaxen bandage, and extract them with your fingers, and immediately powder some powders around the incision to serve as cauterization for them; or cauterize them as was described earlier in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And immediately treat them with other methods until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the pus does not flow out, then make an incision with a lancet in the place where there is a small bite, and wash it with the water that is in the bowel so that the pus flows out quickly when it is pressed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is easily treated, and you should take them with your fingernail or hook, and incise them, and then treat them as we have said until they heal.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for those who require suturing, proceed as follows: take silk wrapped around a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids from above at the parts, and make the needle penetrate to the other side at the base, and tie the two ends of the thread below the needle horizontally; tighten the hemorrhoid firmly with the structure, and then knot the silk and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this for all of them, leaving one unsewn so that the excess blood can flow from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place on the wound a cloth soaked in rose oil or in cerate; and place that on the wound and order the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And place that in a container; and when it is prepared, apply those remedies or another treatment until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Frequently, accidents occur due to the extension of a fissure or constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they are old and do not respond to that medicine, you should scrape those areas with the point of a scalpel or your fingernail until they become moist and allow the pus to drain from them, which prevents their consolidation; and then treat them until they heal.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Now you should scrape away the pus more vigorously than at first until some bleeding occurs and the area is inflamed; and then treat them until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the treatment of hemmorhoids, which is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that almehmir, which is crucial, and it appears as small round spots according to the color of the skin, similar to the head of a nail, and they appear all over the body but more so in the lower parts below the waist, and from these you feel pain throughout the body.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Then it is necessary to incise what is around the spot, and hold it with forceps or tweezers, and remove it from its root; and then treat it.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the area around it as described in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Of warts, it is a small raised rough fistulated round prominence on the surface of the body, and they appear in most children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The treatment for them is to cut them open and extract what lies within, whether it be fat or hair.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize that area, as we have said, either with fire or with a sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And both those that grow in reverse and those that do not can be removed with the instrument of which I speak.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Of ant bite marks, they are small raised or large fistulated prominences on the surface of the body often accompanied by pain, and when touched, they feel like an ant bite, and they occur around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The treatment for them is to take a needle made of eagle feather or vulture feather, and it should be strong, and place that on the ant bite within the circle of the needle; then rotate your hand with the needle until you cut out what is around the ant bite, and press it into the flesh so that you eradicate the ant bite from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a needle of iron or of steel in this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the tip of the needle be fine, blunt (that is, not sharp), wrapped such that when held by the finger, it feels smooth and easy to rotate.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize the ant bite, do so as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	On the form of the instruments that are provided for castration.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes castration is performed with instruments made of silver or lead or melted and hammered metal; and sometimes they are made of small or large instruments according to those to whom they are administered, for the one who is treated in the cure of young children should be small; and for those whose testicles are tender or painful, their castrating instruments should be smaller.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of the large and few castration instruments:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the cannula above, where the bag is tied, should be wide according to this manner; and at the place where the bag is tied it should be as you see.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of it below, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (that is, not open) like a lion's tail, with subtlety; and on one side of it there are two flanges, and on the other side one flange, and the width of the flange should be according to the thickness of the rays, slightly thicker.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines are placed should be made of animal bladder or sheep's wool, and the length of it should be one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be perforated with threads as it is rolled; and the space between the threads should be as thick as a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those threads strong honey from raw honey, which should be of this amount, or around it; and adjust the bag accordingly; and when the bag is placed on it, it should be tight at the head of the instrument between two distinct tight bindings, and then castrate with that each thread: But the quality of castrating with that is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the quantity tolerated by the patient; and take care not to make it too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Let the patient lie on their back, and raise his buttocks with something under him like a cushion or a leather pad; then anoint the tip of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or similar substances. Then gently insert it into the anus until it is fully inside, and the assistant squeezes the bag vigorously so that everything in the rectum is evacuated; then remove the instrument from the rectum and allow the patient to lower his buttocks.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine induces vomiting, let it continue as long as possible; and if he can sleep through the entire night, that is better for recovery.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you treat such diseases of abdominal fluid and vomiting with the cautery, then continue using the cautery until he is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a gentle and thin catheter, like those used for children's enemas.
De curacio de las plaguas.	On the treatment of plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already stated in the division of the treatment of plagues what was appropriate for the book, and I will now describe the treatment of those with the plague using medicines according to the regimen.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that plagues are diverse depending on what causes the plagues and depending on the location where the plague occurs.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which plagues occur are such as stone formation, or incision of sword or knife, or striking with a lance, or stick, or arrow, or similar to those from various causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Here are the plagues that are in the parts of the body such as the plague which occurs on the head, the neck, the feet, the belly, the groin, and similar ones to those affecting the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I also recommend the treatment of certain plagues, so that you pause that reasoning and rule regarding other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple plagues of the head, for the recall of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Then I say that when you encounter a simple plague on the head and it is not a fracture, you should consider: if it is due to a blow from a stone or something similar, and if only the skin has been broken but there is great swelling and you fear that an abscess might form internally, then you must proceed immediately and perform trepanation of the skull without delay; do not postpone this unless there is some prohibitive reason for not doing so, especially if little blood comes out from the wound.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And let the trepanation be on the opposite side of the affected area; and keep the patient from overeating and from eating heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some reason prevents you from performing it immediately, then reduce the patient's food intake and do not allow them to consume meat or rich foods.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And be cautious about the plague, if an internal abscess occurs, and apply only rose oil or in a liquid that has been stypticized.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if you are sure of an internal abscess, then be cautious about the wound, especially if it is fresh and the blood and air have not yet changed the powder that I recommend applying lightly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, pause at certain intervals until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	And if the wound is large or due to incision with a sharp object and the lips of the wound do not come together by themselves, then adjust those with sutures as I will describe concerning suture.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	And if the wound is already exposed to the bone and sinew, and there is no need for it to be held together except with a small suspender, then incise it and immediately treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in place of the suspender, and instruct the patient to eat foods that are nutritious: meat, fish, and similar items until they recover.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the suspender and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all of that rotten part and remove it, and then treat it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	And if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flow can occur, and it does not stop with medicines, then inquire about the artery, and if you find that uncut, then cut it with a scalpel, or ligate it; and if necessity compels you to do what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize until the bleeding stops.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, the cause of them is minor; sprinkle this powder on them, as it will consolidate the wound before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method for the powder is as follows: take oil of sesame one part, dragon's blood two parts, and burnt frankincense three parts; mix them thoroughly and sieve it, then fill the wound with it, and secure it with good compression so that it adheres to the wound, and let it coagulate with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And apply plasters above the poultices and leave them on without removing them while it is still such that it has not become an abscess, for medicine does not eradicate it until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes this cure is done solely when it is not at hand the juice and blood of dragon.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this method of operation is performed on large wounds when it is necessary to place them flat and narrow, and for fresh wounds to apply their blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially when it is in summer, then do not apply this powder to their condition, but instead treat them as we have said, placing over them some cold applications or applying flour poultices with water and honey until they begin to rot; and then cure them with the other treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if it happens that the wound is a fracture of the bone, and it is small, then you extract it with your hands.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will describe the treatment of fractures of the head in what follows.
De las plaguas del col.	Of wounds to the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and between a simple wound of the head, it is the same.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery is severed, then if it is a nerve, there should be no immediate treatment but rather avoid any cure that strongly constricts, such as zinc ore and similar substances which harm the nerves and contract them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	Do not pause on any cause of the plague, for the substance of the nerves is affected and their continuity goes up to the brain, which is the source of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if this is the case where someone is treated with mild medicines, such as being washed with warm water, sometimes infused in rose oil or non-rose oil, and then dried when washed with warm water, and other stones are applied according to this method, and moisture is found.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is severe, then administer sutures, or close its edges, and afterward treat it with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound is deep or if there is corruption in its deepest part, then pierce it at the most affected location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if an artery is already cut and bleeding occurs, then ligate or cauterize it if the necessity arises for such action.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the neck or the entire spine have already been cut, and only the veins of the neck remain intact, then you should close the edges of the wound with sutures near the bone of the neck without touching it; first equalize it and reduce it to its natural shape, and afterward strengthen it with proper support, and leave it for several days; then treat it with powders that have astringent and excitatory properties until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has already become infected in the bone, then probe it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all that you can; and what is not suitable for removal, leave it until the wound becomes pus-filled, and the swelling subsides.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle over it the powder which has been recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if a fistula is formed in the wound, now treat it with the liquid whose description will come shortly in its chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	About wounds of the neck or similar ones that are made between the shoulders, whether by a spear, knife, sword, or similar weapon.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a thrust wound from a spear or knife, and you feel its depth, now consider whether there is swelling when the injured person inhales; then you will know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with its own blood, now apply powder to it during the first hour, and do not press on it so that the blood does not remain trapped in its depth and return to the heart to injure it, but apply a binding dressing, and change it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the dressing is not available to you, now place over the wound opening a piece of cloth to absorb what is left of the moisture; and make the injured person lie on the wound so that it can run out whatever remains within.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed since the wound and no spasms, trembling of heart, or constriction of breath has occurred, and you see other good signs from it, then you know that the wound is safe; and then treat it with bandages and the usual care until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if healing of it is delayed and much time has passed, then you know that a fistula has formed; treat it therefore according to its chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is from a slash with a knife or a sword, and it is simple on the surface of the skin or the flesh, then treat it as you would with stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If there has already been inflammation in the bone, and some of the severed pieces are loose, then you should turn the wound and try to extract those pieces if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separate, then leave them inside until the wound heals, because their removal is difficult.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other wounds in the other limbs, the treatment during healing is as we have described.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the wounds of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The condition that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, slight, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	In severe cases, sometimes the bowel or its nerves are affected, which requires intervention and stitching to be more forceful and delicate.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A small disruption is difficult to treat by other means, and it is important that reducing them is more difficult if you do not promptly return them to their proper place, as they become swollen and enlarged, making the instrument for doing so difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore, the best disruption is moderate, as in that case it is not difficult to reduce the bowel, unlike in the two types mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you should know that stitching of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two types of stitches are common and suitable for stitching other wounds of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	Of two other sutures proper communicate with other wounds, but however more in the suture of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you each exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the wound is small and it is caused by some reason in the bowel, and it is difficult to reduce that, then there are two ways: either due to the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when inflammation has come to the bowel due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when that is so, then it is necessary for you to warm that in such a way that you submerge a sponge or cloth in lukewarm water alone, or soak it in hot water with cyperus and spica, and apply it to the bowel until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes I do this with one in which there is styptic quality, and it is better than water alone for resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see the inflammation resolved, then you moisten the bowel with water in which hyssop and wormwood are soaked, for by this the instrument of pain is alleviated slightly.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the instrument of pain persists near this treatment, then you should divide the rupture slightly with an instrument used for excising hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate and does not require cutting, and there is no need to dry out near necessity and deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, this is its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the sharp side of the bone, and the other part not sharp, and the extremity subtle, and not like the subtlety of dust, but rather slightly blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And so when the flap is enlarged and lifted from the fascia, now it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible over that, for that is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the incision is wide and in the lower part of the abdomen, now it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their arms closer to their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you place the head and feet higher than the lower parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the incision is on one of the two sides of the abdomen, now you should always direct your attention and consideration so that the part where the wound is lies higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And so you should administer this for large wounds and for smaller wounds as well.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And for small wounds, place what is at hand ready, and then have the one most skilled among you perform it, who should hold the incision entirely with their hand and close the lips of it, and then proceed to suture it appropriately.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or a needle holder according to the quantity and amplitude of the wound; then lay it from the extremity of the incision at the ring finger, and tighten the needle once, ensuring that you do not place thread at both ends of the stitch, but rather between the two edges of the wound interiorly; and when you have brought together both ends of the stitch and both edges of the wound, this makes four stitches.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Take a needle and double the thread around it, and pass two sutures from both sides upwards, then bring together the two lips of the wound and the suture by appropriate joining; then take the thickness of your finger and place another needle in that, then tie that knot as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if necessary with the needles until you have completed the entire contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be medium in coarseness and subtlety, for fine needles enter the flesh quickly; and thick ones are difficult to insert into the tissue, and therefore it is appropriate that they be medium in both subtlety and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not appropriate for the needle to be inserted at both ends of the wound simultaneously, because this would cause the flesh to be cut too quickly and the wound might heal improperly before consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not extend the sutures too much so that the wound is not hindered from proper consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not bother the patient while sleeping; and place poultices spread out around the sutures, which should cover the ends of the needles; and leave them in place until you know that the wound has already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And this type of suture with needles is most convenient for small wounds, as you only need one or two needles or around that number.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	However, the second type of suture is common: it involves managing four ends of the sutures, from both sides of the wound and its two extremities, in one go, with a needle that is appropriately balanced in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	When the needle has penetrated these four extremities, withdraw the needle from that part of its division where you began, so that the suture retreats from the pus most remote part to the wound, so that the seam is a thread suture along with which the threads are tightly drawn.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known to people.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And in such a suture I sewed the wound that had been inflicted on a man's belly with a knife, and the disruption of the wound was greater than one palm, and it was situated around two palms from the midgut and the disruption was at the center of the limb; then I reduced it after the gut had been outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated within the space of fifteen days or so, and I treated it, and he was healed; and after that he walked with crutches for some time, and then returned to his usual activities.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by miracle fire, for I did not treat him with any ointment, as it was in a place where no ointment or medicine could reach, but I placed the wound over coals twice a day and washed it frequently with honey water until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will describe two types of suture proper according to the narrative of the Word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin the suture from the edge, and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so when the needle penetrates into the bone and in that place cut straight according to the length of the entire body, and leave the extremity of the thread through which you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate into the other extremity the needle from inside to outside in the other extremity of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that penetration, then make another penetration in that same extremity of the wound from outside to inside; and leave the extremity of the thread that is in this place, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from inside to outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make that penetration such that when you penetrate it with the thread at the extremity of the wound, which is inside, all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then start from this side and take it to the extremity that is of the thread on the other side, and extract the needle from the bone through which it penetrates, and then reinsert it into that bone and attach the end of the thread that is on the other side to this end of the wound; and extract it from the bone that is on this side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this one side and then the other, and do this one stitch after another until you sew up everything that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the essence of this suturing method is that you sew with a suture of skins as if sewing fur; in such a way that you sew the thread one time from the side of the bone's extremity, and leave it for another pass until you complete it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Here is the translation:
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Take the needle and place it at the end of the incision nearest you, then insert it into the inner part through that spot, and leave both ends of the thread; then turn the needle and pass it from outside to inside through both ends of the thread.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then turn each of them around and pass each one from the inner part to the outer part through both ends of another incision on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suturing is better than the common simple suturing, and it is the type of suturing about which I have just given a description.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Gualia.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And if someone may say that the suturing of the abdomen is done with two needles, it is because you insert a thread into each one, and start by threading the needle as you should, and pass each one through the opposite side according to the method used for sewing clothes.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you should know that when a disruption is in the middle of the abdomen, then the suturing of it is more difficult than for other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the judgment in the treatment of wounds is the same as for other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	This is because when you manage a recent wound with its blood before the air alters it, and reduce the edges and clean it properly, then apply powder to it.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply some ingredients that naturally form a hard crust and bind the threads, and make sure the thread and dressing are secure; then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If the medicines are not at hand, then wait for a short while, because it begins to gather pus and forms a crust, and change that twice a day, as you have been taught, until it is healed, so that you do not need other medication in many conditions when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the wound may communicate to the principal limbs, then cover it with wool from a sheep submerged in high-quality oil or scented oil, and place this around the area between the joints and apply it to them.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if pain or putrefaction occurs in the bowels, since this often happens, then apply styptic black thyme to it, and especially if the putrefaction has reached the bowel and an incision needs to be made into its depth.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that what affects the thick bowel is harder to heal than what affects the thin bowels.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal when the bowel called “gegunu” does not easily recover from a wound that occurs in it; and this is due to the great number of veins within it, its large size, the subtlety of its structure, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what proceeds from the wound is tissue, and you obtain that which is fresh, reduce it according to your skill in the same way as you would reduce the bowels.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed into the space and already turned green or black, then when you apply something firm over the place that is discolored, so that blood may flow out, since there are veins and arteries in the tissue.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Here is the translation:
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Recollection of the injuries that occur in the bowel.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a rupture occurs in the bowel and it is small, it is possible that it can be repaired in some people, because I saw one who had been injured in his abdomen by a lance wound, and the injury was on the right side of the stomach, and the injury was old and had become a fistula, with discharge and gas.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I bandaged the wound, although I was not confident in its healing, but I carefully examined that part which would heal and where the tissue is solidified.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And when I saw the place already consolidated, I warned about the harm that could come from this bad event in his abdomen; and no one suffered further harm due to this accident by changing their eating and drinking habits, and subsequently taking baths and exercising as advised.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced individuals say that when there is a small injury in the bowel, it should be treated as follows: take ants with large heads; then bring together the edges of the wound and place one of those ants, which has its mouth open, on the edges of the wound. When it bites onto them and tightens its mouth, cut off its head because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another ant next to the first one, and do not stop placing ants one next to the other according to the quantity of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that and close the wound; and let those heads remain in the bowel until the bowel is healed; and may no harm come to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	It is possible that the gut suture be tied with fine thread made from animal intestine, as it is more suitable for needles; and you should take one end of this gut suture, which is bare, and tie it to one end of the fine silk thread, wrapped around it, and then insert that thread into needles and knot it with the gut, and reduce it at the point.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of stitching with ants is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it involves one of the fine intestines, then at that time there is only a delicate treatment, and not a complete healing of it.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that every wound and abscess when it becomes old and chronic, and forms an ulcer, and is not consolidated and continues to discharge for a long time without being excised, whether in any part of the body, is generally called a fistula, and we refer to it as such an abscess.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a fistula is indeed a felted node, hard and white, at which there is no pain but to which there is a discharge, just as there is a discharge from the sore of a bird; hence it is called a cockle or sore.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in some people a moist sore, which discharges continuously; and the moisture is often excised within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And at times this moisture is thick and little, and it is coarse or fine.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	This has been said in the division when I discuss wounds, that every ulcer which is not healed or is on unclothed flesh, is due to one of these causes: one of which is either because there is little healing power in the body; or because it is a poor wound; or because between it and the lips is hard skin preventing the growth of flesh; or because it is made of soft material; or because that ulcer itself is rotten and the matter sent to it is of bad quality; or because the medicine used for its treatment is unsuitable; or when corruption sets in the region, which is pestilence; or by virtue of the property of the region such as Saragossa where diseases are difficult to digest and healing of abscesses is delayed naturally; or because there is bone within it, or bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have shown all those causes, the signs of them, and their cure with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is necessary for me to tell you about the treatment of fistulas, which is done through surgical operation.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; among them are fistulas that extend to large veins and arteries, or to nerves, or to the spleen, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to any of the compound joints such as those of the hand and foot; and there are also those that affect the proximity of principal members and similar parts.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore, among these fistulas that occur in this manner, they are among the diseases difficult to heal, and do not readily receive treatment, and dealing with them requires hard work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if any of the fistulas has a depth that does not reach the places mentioned above, and you hope for and trust in its cure, and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula runs straight ahead, explore it with this.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	And if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of thin lead, for the lightness of its body causes it to be easily guided and curved around the tortuosities.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has openings that are horrible or difficult to approach, it is not within your power to signify upon them with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then inject through one opening for the others, for the moisture you inject will go to the other openings and flow from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire carefully according to the method by which you can know if here there is bone or nerve, and whether the depth of the fistula is long or short, or whether it is a fistula with openings at both ends, over all this within your strength, within your thorough investigation, within which you investigate the malady, and the invention of the pain according to your compression on the spot, and similar signs and accidental causes related to an abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood on all those causes with true judgment, then proceed to the cure according to confidence: and that is that you now consider whether it is a fistula that is apparent and near or in a salt location, distant from a joint, or from a nerve, or from an artery, or from a vein, or from one of the places I have told you about.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Now you should treat the fistula according to what was said before about its description, and remove what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what has grown out from the skin opening or similar, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of great depth and follows a straight course, you must incise it as far inward as possible to the prepuce, and then remove all corrupted flesh from it; afterwards apply hot poultices wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have grasped with forceps.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this for several applications until the sharp medicine has dissolved everything that remains in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with applications that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it does not heal with this treatment, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you need to determine this, then you should explore it and dry it out as we have recommended, without prohibiting any cause related to veins or nerves or major limbs, as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackening, then you should excise that until all the corruption is removed; afterwards treat it with what promotes flesh growth until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it does not heal and pus continues to discharge as before, then you will know that you have not fully eradicated the corruption; therefore, uncover it again and carefully examine its condition and cleanse it thoroughly with your own hand, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it heals, that is good; but if not, then you will know that the corruption is in the deep recesses of the body, which you have not reached, and therefore you should only dress that area.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, it is up to you to remove that; then you pull it out with subtle forceps which are suitable for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any of them behind for any reason due to your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if any cause of moisture opposes you, and in their incision there is neither fear nor hesitation, then incise those ligaments or muscles if necessary, and release the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if it is not the right time for you to remove the bones at that moment, then apply something that can alleviate the condition on the wound, and leave it be until such a time when there is flesh and ligaments around those bones, and keep the wound so that it does not become hardened, and ensure that the section you incised during your operation remains open.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having said that, if you are concerned, apply a cloth submerged in hot water with oil, or a cloth submerged in Egyptian ointment, or any of the green ointments, because when these ligaments will begin to heal, and the bones are separated from their attachment, and this traction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone such as the bone of an elephant or similar, and what is corrupted of it is only its surface, then scrape that off with a rasp only from behind until the blackness and corruption are removed, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if what is corrupted of it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area and completely incise within the place where the corruption has spread, and then treat it until it becomes consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	Here is what is recommended for you concerning what happens to a person in their condition so that you may use this as an example and assistance regarding your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man around xxx years old complained of pain in his body, and the part inside him was affected by an injury involving matter inside the body that had reached the affected area, and this matter formed into a large abscess, and it did not have an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	Then the condition extended over time due to the error of the physicians, causing the abscess to become hardened, and pus accumulated within it. His treatment was postponed until an opening was made in the swelling, through which all the putrefaction and moisture of the body were discharged.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	Then many physicians attended to him for two years, and none of them had knowledge or skill in the art until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	I saw the swelling on him and the matter that was flowing from those openings in large quantities; his body was completely emaciated, and his complexion was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	Then I inserted a probe into one of those openings and it reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then I immediately examined all the openings and found that they extended to various parts of the swelling.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	Then I decided to incise one of the openings and discovered part of the bone that was corrupted; it had turned earth-like, decayed, and blackened. Part of the swelling had also penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I used what was shown to me and prepared from the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I cut out not from the bone but that corruption which I had recognized and prepared to remove.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I paused the restoration of the wound with healing medicines for a long time, and it did not heal.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I reopened and exposed the bone again beyond the initial exposure, and found continuing corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I treated what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I attempted to perform the healing and restoration, and it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I exposed it on another occasion and did not cease to excise the bone little by little specifically, attempting the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I excised around a palm's width of it, along with that portion containing its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it healed quickly and became well.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to repeat the operation and section of it except due to the disposition of its fever and the lack of its tolerance and fear of death, for it suffered at all hours from excess of fainting spells and bad evacuations.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus he was completely healed, and nothing remained in place of the bone but living flesh; and his condition improved in his body, and his strength returned; and he recovered to his previous state and did not experience contrary effects while walking or in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if it is a prominent bone in place of the injured body part, then you should proceed as follows: take a thread and tie it at the end of that prominent bone; and order someone to extend that thread; pause with another thicker piece of thread after the first one; and then wrap the thread over the flesh near the bone, extending its ends so that you pull the flesh towards the sides; and thus expose the flesh where you wish to cut so that the scissors do not injure the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	Place the saw or table below the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to use the saw on the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	You should place the saw on the slightly corrupted area little by little, for if there is corruption in the concavity of the bone and it does not appear to the senses, then force the saw from the other side.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted but not prominent, and it is one continuous part with another, and the corruption is in the middle or part of it, then you must uncover the flesh from all sides completely; then place the saw below it, and then saw off the first part where the corruption is until the sawing continues from the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	Place the saw according to the location of the corruption, as we have said, a little at a time.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw off the bone where it continues from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not within reason but is extraordinary.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the center of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you, and then expose that area, and clean that area according to each possible disposition, and whenever an extraordinary case arises, correct it as long as it does not come into conflict with veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know which incision tools and saws to use for these bones, as they vary according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, their fineness and size, their hardness and rarity; therefore, it is necessary that you prepare appropriate instruments for each type of operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that the operation signifies to you according to the kind of instrument of which you need; when you are great in study and long and knowledge of the methods of this art, and witness of ways of diseases, then you have by yourself what is appropriate to each of the instruments for every disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I tell you forming at the end of this chapter the number of the instruments which you will place as simples among which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experiment upon the others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:  
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of a needle:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this needle be in the shape of a star-shaped keyhead, and let its points be in the form of stepped points.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not sufficient unless the heads of the joints are rubbed with them when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is large and wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of a larger razor than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another saw properly made: let it be made with the top part curved upwards and the sharp edge made of iron, and the handle made appropriately like a knife.
Forma de lu:	Form of this:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of a razor in which there is a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor with a curved tip:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small razor resembling a tentacle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of scissors used to cut bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another smaller pair of cutting instruments:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another pair of cutting instruments; this one resembling a needle, and the tip of it is like a saw, and it is displayed in appropriate words in proportion to the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Shape of the ligature which is suitable for the ratio of that which is pierced through the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the extremity of it is triangular and has a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and seemingly it suits all the causes that we have mentioned about knives, scissors, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	About the cutting of extremities and the sawing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	Extremities may need to be amputated either due to an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause; or when you have treated the corruption with healing medicines and the treatment does not succeed, or when the corruption spreads from a member without any reason, then it is necessary that you cut off that member up to where the corruption reaches, so that the patient may escape death or serious harm which would be a greater evil than the loss of the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign for that to which it happens is that the member turns black as if burnt by fire, or the corruption spreads close to where the blackness appears before the rot reaches the dry part of the limb and spreads throughout the body; therefore, you must perform amputation on that limb.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if the cause of the corruption is a bite or sting from some venomous creatures such as a scorpion, viper, adder, or similar.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the bite is at the extremity of a finger, then you should amputate the finger and not give space for the corruption to spread into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if it affects the hand, then you should amputate at the joint of the wrist and not give space for the corruption to spread into the elbow joint.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you encounter that [condition], then cut the arm at the joint in the collarbone.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption spreads around the collarbone, then death is imminent for the patient; and to treat another condition requires another cause in this cure, which is the quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, when corruption affects the foot, then you must cut it at one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it affects the sole of the foot, then you must amputate the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it penetrates to the toenail, then you must cut the toe at the joint of the nail.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread to the toenail, then there is no remedy but dismissal, and leave the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of cutting off a limb or tying it is that you tie a tourniquet above the part where you wish to cut, and another bandage over the area; and extend a bandage to the parts below, and have another bandage extended above; and you separate the skin which is between two bandages with about one finger’s breadth until all the flesh is exposed; and then it can be cut or tied.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it is necessary to cover the patient with a cloth from all sides so that it does not touch the affected area, and to ensure that the wound is properly dressed and the abscess cauterized.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if blood flow occurs when you are working, then you should cauterize the area immediately, or apply some powders to stem the bleeding; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Apply bandages to the injured limb as is appropriate, and take care of it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you to treat the person who is injured in his place, this year due to an accident for which I advised you, an accident that resulted in blackening of the skin as if it were burned by fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption from the accident initially affects the skin inside the finger and tends to spread over the entire body.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then the person prepares for that year's pus to go out of the member along with the intensity of what is blackened by pain and burning, and he cuts that skin at the joint, and it will heal.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long ago, this annual corruption affected the finger of the indicated hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it happened to me, and I had to remove that excess according to what I prescribed for the treatment of the hand with regard to the cleanliness of the body; and the excess was not removed, and it began to spread to another finger on the same hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asked me to cut off the hand, but I did not want to do that, hoping for the removal of that excess, and fearing that cutting off the hand might lead to death, as the power of the poison was very strong.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And after he left me, he returned to his own land, and I was told that the man prepared and amputated his entire hand, and he healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have included this narrative only to assist in understanding the nature of this illness and to provide guidance on how it should be treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids and the quality of enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in any fleshy member and the space of the abscess is extended inward so that it forms a collection of pus, and then it bursts and perforates, and the pus is discharged from there, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin above it remains thin like cloth, and has not yet reached corruption, nor does it impress upon bone or nerve or tendon, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space extends inward so that corruption impresses upon some member, now it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for it is to incise that skin completely as it has been formed, and especially when it is thin like cloth, and ensure that you do not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	However, if you hope that the skin will adhere and that the corruption has not yet reached its final stage, and there is pus passing through the skin, now you should treat it with enemas.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And when you consider the sinus, if it is large and the arm that you are using smells foul, then treat it with an Egyptian medicine which consists of oil, vinegar, and rue in equal parts, and mix them together in a vessel, and cook them over fire until the medicine becomes thick like honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take the amount that is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; use this to administer an enema to the sinus, plug the opening, and leave the medicine inside for the duration of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	From there extract that which is held in little regard; and do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the pus is evacuated.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And on some occasions it is administered as an enema with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present at your disposal; and you should take the ashes of wheat, put them over the water; and then filter that, and administer it as an enema until you are confident that the sinus is now closed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then administer it with water and honey mixed thoroughly three times; and administer it with vinegar and honey mixed, because the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and the vinegar makes the sinus adhere, especially when the vinegar has an excess of astringency and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And as you do this on some occasions and become confident that the sinus is now evacuated, then administer an enema with something that promotes flesh growth.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you should take of the decoction of dyafinicon and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent vinegar; or administer that along with some medicines and other decoctions which have the properties I have already written about in the chapter on decoctions.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and does not allow the enema tube to be received, then you should gradually widen it with a small instrument, and pause in the procedure wrapped in Egyptian or basilicon decoction until it is widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly, if the opening is wide, then you should bring together the edges of it with a suture and leave it in such a way that the enema can be administered without addition.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening of the hole from which the arm protrudes is raised to the upper parts, then dry that in the pus base located where the arm runs below, for when the arm is constricted in the depth of the bend the flesh will be generated there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus beneath around the pus base as you wish, then perforate so that you prepare the member for the preparation by which the arm protrudes lightly as you are equipped and without any cause detaining the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that should be applied to the sinus appropriately so that you can extend them over cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such quantity as to cover all of the sinus; then carefully cut with scissors along the edge of the sinus opening a bit wider than the opening itself; then extend over another piece of cloth some ointment according to the size of the slit, and place it in position at a distance from the sinus opening so that the arm movement is not hindered by the large cloth but only after several days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	But that which is over the sinus opening, which you must change at all times so that it dries what is inside the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know whether what protrudes from the arm is much or little, or whether it is digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And with this, you should consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and whether there is an abscess present.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the material placed over the sinus opening has adhered or will soon adhere, then on the third day loosen it, and when you loosen the dressing, change the cloth to another one and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	If the sinew is very close to the skin and the pus is thin and subtle, do not despair of its adhesion, for it will heal properly. For there are some people in whom the generation of flesh in their sores takes a long time, and others in whom the opposite occurs.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the sinew remains separate from the skin for many days and is still indigestible, then you should know that the sinew does not adhere. And if the adherence of the sinew is delayed and this is due to a prolonged cause, then adjust in drying the medicines; and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they must be dried as well when it is adjusted, for there is superfluous addition of grease.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And when the pus is to be treated, take what has been purified and dissolve it in rose oil. Then apply it over the wound with another substance that has similar properties, and use it accordingly.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems appropriate in that action, when there is no skin, to take purified substance and honey, and when it is cooked so that it thickens, use it. Or take myrrh and aloes and sendes, mix them all together, powder them over the honey which is on the fire, and then apply this over a cloth and bind it; or apply the honey you have cooked until it thickens, sprinkle it with powder over a cloth, and bind it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes it is administered with long-leaf artemisia and seeds of lilies (and celestial lilies) and flour of oats and centaurea, using those simple or prepared ingredients, mixing them together, sifting them, powdering them over the recommended honey; and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged and is not healed by this treatment, then you know that the corruption is in its root, and it has spread to the bones or other hard members or to the ligaments; now treat it with a fistula treatment as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	On the treatment of boilings and chafed nails and the cutting of an added finger and division.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	A boil is an abscess that typically arises under the nail of a toe or finger, and it can also occur in other fingers. If it persists and its treatment is delayed, or if it is an abscess caused by cautery, or if it becomes corrupted, it may secrete pus internally which corrodes the root of the nail. It often corrupts the entire area, sometimes spreading to the bone inside, causing a foul odor, and rendering the end of the finger or toe useless, turning its color dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have applied the treatment as we described in the division and it does not improve your condition, then you should incise with a scalpel all the superfluous tissue that is decayed under the nail and immediately cauterize the wound, for immediate cautery is beneficial in such cases.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the addictions of the nail have withdrawn and the flesh around it begins to hurt and inflame, then you should place a fine probe under the part of the nail that hurts the flesh, elevate it, and incise the flesh with ease. Then apply corrosive remedies to what remains of the flesh until it is completely removed; and afterwards treat it with ointments until it heals.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already penetrated the bone, then you should incise the bone and extract it, because it is never healed when the corrupted bone remains.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and corruption spread to the finger, then you should incise it at one of its joints according to where the pain is felt, and afterwards treat it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if there is a puncture or abrasion on the nail and it causes severe pain, then at the beginning you should bleed the patient, and afterwards dry the nail with a sharp instrument in a transverse cut from top to bottom, but be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for you would cause intense pain to the patient, and it would lead to the formation of excessive scar tissue in the area; and then treat the affected area with something that alleviates pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But in the case of a swollen finger, which occurs in many people, it is often full of flesh, or it is soft on the bones, or it is often in the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them arise at the root of the joint, or it is the swelling in some joints of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But the one that arises in some joints of the finger is not serious, and the one that arises at the joints is more severe.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those that are fleshy swellings, the incision is shallow, and you should make it behind the base with a broad instrument.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But for the one that arises at the root of the joint, the treatment is difficult; therefore, be careful not to amputate it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In that which is described about nuts, you should incise the flesh at the beginning with a round incision into the bone, and then use one of those saws suitable for this purpose, and then treat what is within so that it may be healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	In the case of consolidation that occurs between the bones due to scarring from injury or because of the person's birth, or due to consolidation from illness or fire damage, then you should treat that consolidation until the mentioned parts return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between the strips of the enfused in rose oil so that they do not consolidate too quickly, and separate them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until they are consolidated as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some of the mentioned parts on the palm, then you should treat that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suited to the shape of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	For incisions of veins, these are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins are varicose when they are swollen and full of melancholic humors that flow to the limbs of the body, and their primary occurrence is in the legs, especially in the legs of those who travel, work, or carry heavy loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then you should administer purgation of the body with black hellebore several times to strongly expel it, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment for them involving iron is according to two methods: one is that it should be incised and the black blood drawn out, and the other method is that the vein should be raised and completely extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of the procedure is as follows: at the beginning, place a basin under to catch what comes out so that the thick blood is resolved, which is sediment in the basin. Then apply the basin to the most pus-infected part of the wound below the bone with a bandage and then make an incision wide in one place or two places or three. Then lift the black blood with your hand from below the basin up into it as much as you want and as often as is necessary until the quantity of blood has been removed that you wish and that the patient's constitution can bear.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then give him some food and order him to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And iterate the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and inform the patient about this.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	However, the elevation of it is as follows: if you see that the patient's basin has hair and then place him in a bath or apply hot water to his basin until he blushes and the veins are swollen; or have him exercise strenuously if a bath is not available, until the limb becomes warm.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the area on the side of the vein by making an incision either at the end or behind the bone, or at the lowest part near the ankle.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then scratch the area with hooks and scrape the vein from all sides until it appears to the touch, and it should be observed that as you treat it, it gradually turns darker.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And thus when you examine it, look for the white part that feels firm.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Place then the knife upright so that it is raised and angled from the rib cage, and suspend it there for one hour.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then cut another section near that section for three reasons, and then peel the rib cage above the vein that appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then raise that and incise it in the rear section near the heel, and then extract it and raise it until it exits through the second section, and then extract it from the section above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract it from the section that is highest or farthest from all sections, until it all exits; then incise it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not manage to extract and raise it, then insert a strong double-threaded needle and pull it out, or insert the knife below and rotate your hand in all directions until it is dislodged.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful not to cut it; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to raise that piece, and the patient will suffer from that harm.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when you have completely removed it all, then apply to the wound wool soaked in wine and rose oil and plain oil, and treat it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vessel is contracted with twists for which it has a covering in the parts, and it is not straight as we have said, then you should cut along each twist of it and at the places where it is covered, and then suspend it for an hour until you raise it completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And guard yourself in your section that you do not incise the vein and that you do not obstruct it, for it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and use your prudence in this.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Form of the incident by which the operation is performed:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of applying ointment:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not to be made as sharp as a scalpel nor with a pointed end so that it does not obstruct the vein; and it should have great flexibility, for if it were delicate, it would cut the vein because of its delicateness; however, it should not be excessively thick as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of the extraction of the leg vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the camels in warm lands such as Al-Ategi in the land of Arabs and in the warm and dry lands of India where no grass or food grows.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And similarly it is generated in other parts of the body besides the camels.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its gestation is from putrefaction that occurs below the skin, just as worms and vermin come from within the body of serpents and other creatures, generating between the skin and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the occurrence of it is that this vein causes inflammation in the camel; near the location, blisters appear; and soon the vein begins to emerge from the place of those blisters, resembling a plant sprout.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the extremity of it becomes apparent, then you should wrap around it a piece of lead weighing one drachma within two drachmas, and secure that area, leaving the lead suspended from the camel.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And so many times when you need something for the parts outside, wrap it in lead and attach that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is elongated, then you cut a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not cut that which is ragged until it has come out, for if you cut that which is ragged it contracts and goes into the flesh, causing an abscess, putrefaction in the place, and a bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	It is necessary that it be treated gently and be extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the rear of it and there remains nothing of it in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And this vein is found in some people extending to the length of five palms and I have been told that it has reached up to twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut during the time of its treatment, then insert the reed into the tract and perforate that which is long in the body until all that is inside the material is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the area with medicines for several days; and afterwards treat that as you would an abscess.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and it comes to multiple openings, and is branched from each opening.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore treat that as we have said in the division and according to what has been mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Regarding the section on worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is called in some lands bovine disease because at times it appears among cattle and is a worm that is born between the skin and the flesh, and moves throughout the body up and down, and is shown through the sensation near the affected part of the member by member until it breaks the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	Regarding the generation of worms, it is through the putrefaction of certain humors, just as happens with worms and serpents and maggots and pinworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	It is feared because of its malice, for when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and reaches the heart, then suddenly a very light wind blows in it and enters and destroys the heart, and thus many deaths occur.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you wish to cure that and extract it, then it is done only by means of the movement and appearance of it to the senses, and at that moment you should press what is above it and what is below it with a bandage and strong constriction, and immediately dry over it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is hidden in the flesh and you do not find it, then you should pause and cauterize with fire over the place where it resides, and the main cause to be feared is the corruption of it by which it corrupts the place as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you see that it has reached the head near the heart, then press above the eyebrows with strong constriction, and immediately dry over it, and extract that; and it is necessary for the patient to use purification of their body with medicines evacuating putrid bad humors, and guard against foods generating putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Regarding the treatment of nasal illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called "nafir" in our land, and it is pain that occurs in certain limbs, and then it is transferred from one limb to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that as I will now recount to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I went to see a sick woman in a village, and uncovered her arm, where I found a small inflammation in the funis vein of the arm. After removing it for about an hour, I saw that this swelling subsided as quickly as wax melts under heat, but more rapidly than could be expected, as if it were living silver flowing from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	Then the pain moved from that location to the muscle, and it remained there for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it quickly moved to the other side of her body and reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then she told me that it was moving throughout her body just as I had observed, and I was greatly amazed by the change and the speed at which it moved from one limb to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had seen this before in my own patients in the manner described, but I have never witnessed such rapid pain moving from one limb to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see this in my patients as I did in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I thought this was due to the fact that the woman was elderly, with weak limbs and exposed veins, and in her, this windiness appeared as changing sensations.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this does not appear in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with engorged veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to treat it and the patient feels that pain, immediately apply heat to that area as we have said, then press firmly on it until the confined windiness is expelled, and cauterize the location.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you do not apply it to your wounds, then treat that with massage of the body and with what expels windiness, and anoint those with stinking pills and with Serapion pills and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of the extraction of splinters.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Splinters are diverse according to their types and the parts of the body where they lodge, for their diversity is such that some have large points, others small, concave or blunt, solid ones as well. And there are those with three angles, and among them are those with tongues; and also slender pieces.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and parts of the body where they lodge is in two ways: for the members or principal members concave, such as the brain, heart, spine, lungs, ribs, bowels, bladder, and similar; therefore, when you find one of these members affected by a splinter and signs of death appear to you, which I will explain shortly, then it is necessary that you avoid extracting the splinter from those in whom death quickly follows such major conditions. And when no such bad signs appear to you and the splinter is not hidden deep within the member, then you extract it and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of the brain when struck by a splinter and it penetrates the bone, and exits at the fontanelle which is above the brain, are caused by severe heat, scotoma, vertigo, rigidity in the wounds, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, vomiting of bile, and often speech is cut off and the voice destroyed. Moisture similar to flour exits from the affected area, and the appearance indicates an abundance of fluid in the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And so if I recognize these signs in you, then refrain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	Note the signs of the arrow when it hits the heart, so that it is near the left nipple, and feel how it is lodged in a hard place, not soft tissue; and the movement of the arrow is similar to the pulse movement, and there is black blood from the wound, and the extremities become cold, and sweating occurs, and fainting; therefore, you will know that death approaches very soon.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are frothy blood from the wound, and the veins near the neck become swollen, and the patient's complexion changes, and they exhale a great breath, and crave for fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow hits the membrane that is in the legs, and the pain at this moment is near the small ribs, it causes great distress and severe pain and sighing, and there is no movement of any part of the limbs.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow hits the stomach, then very quickly you will see that the wound expels any undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow hits the abdomen, and it is lodged there, you will see some opening from the wound, or the membrane, or the intestine which is ruptured, and there is no hope for recovery from the treatment or extraction of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow hits the bladder, and urine comes out from it, and some cause of infection spreads to other parts externally, and quickly there is pain over the patient, then you will know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Thus the other members as well as in the face, the neck, and the groin, and the shoulders and the helpers, and the vertebrae of the back, and the collarbone, and the ribs, and similar parts of the limbs are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not find a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recount this to you as I have seen regarding the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand about their treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The reason for this is that an arrow was embedded in the lacrimal bone at the root of his nose, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving behind only the grey matter of the ear, and he healed without any harm coming to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had embedded in him at the grey matter of his eye, leaving behind only the eyelid. The arrow was already concealed and could not be completely removed except for a small part to which it adhered to its shaft. It was a large sharp arrow of the Turks, with a lion-shaped iron tip that did not have barbs.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew recovered, and no harmful incident occurred to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had it embedded in his groin, and it was an Arabic arrow with barbs. Then I incised around it between two grooves, and it was already submerged in his groin. Then I carefully removed it, and the Christian man recovered.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who had it embedded in his abdomen, and he was thought to die because of it. However, after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition regarding the arrow, I incised around the arrow and removed it carefully, and he recovered without any harmful incident occurring to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And in one man an arrow was embedded in both sides of him, and the wound had healed over it, and after seven years the arrow emerged at the root of his spine.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And there was a woman in whom an arrow had penetrated her abdomen, and the wound had healed over it internally, and she did not change in any of her conditions regarding it, and the woman did not suffer any discomfort during any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And there was another man in whom an arrow had penetrated his face and the wound had healed over it, breaking off the arrow, experiencing no pain hereafter, and similar cases are like this.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And the arrow was extracted from the man who was the prince of the king; it had penetrated just below his nose, and it had slightly shifted towards the right side, and the entire arrow was concealed beneath the skin.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to treat him regarding the embedding of the arrow within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I found the wound of the arrow quite narrow; and then I examined it carefully with a probe, but did not feel anything with it; however, he felt pain just below his right ear, and then I suspected that this pain was due to the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied a plaster to the area containing an ingredient that attracts and digests foreign bodies, hoping that it would cause the location of the arrow to become apparent so that I could operate on it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And no significant change occurred in the area that would indicate the arrow had reached it; and I continued to apply the plaster for several days without any incident; and meanwhile, the wound healed, and he complained of pain from the tip of it after some days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and informed me about this.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Then I applied a sharp corrosive medicine for several days until it reached the bone, and when I tested it, I found that it had penetrated to the fine extremity of the sinew, which adheres to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Then I adjusted the incision of the wound with that sharp medicine until it became visible to me clearly where the tendon ends, and it took me some time, over a period of four months, to complete this.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And as the wound reached a certain size and it became possible for me to insert forceps into it, I did not immediately remove it but rather continued to refine and devise methods of extraction until one day I began to extract it using specially made forceps, according to the form described at the end of this chapter; and then I restored the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, but I did restore it, and the wound healed properly, and the patient recovered completely without any further cause for concern.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I advise you about the quality of extracting certain arrows in order to establish this rule and its significance regarding what I have not mentioned, since the parts of this art and the definitions of them are not comprehensible through mere narration or without referring to the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And skilled artisans compare with a few words; and with what is present concerning what is absent; and they discover new operations and new instruments from the descent of causes foreign to the art when such occasions arise.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore, I say that arrows are not extracted from the members in which they are inserted except in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they enter; or by the opposite part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	Of that which is wounded by the place where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place, and is drawn out and removed.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if he does not obey the order to remove it at the hour when he catches it, you should leave it for some days until the flesh around it heals, and reduce its traction and its exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is embedded in bone and he does not obey the order to remove it, you should leave it for some days and gradually reduce its traction and movement each day until it can be removed.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if he does not obey the order to remove it for some days, then you should perforate around the arrow in that bone with a fine awl until the place is enlarged around the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is embedded in the bone of the head and has penetrated one of the cavities of the brain, and if the injury exhibits any of those symptoms I have mentioned, then abstain from removing the arrow and leave it until his condition stabilizes for some days; for if the arrow remains in place, death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is embedded only in the body of the bone and does not pass into the brain, and the injury remains for some days without any of those harmful symptoms occurring, then you should manage the traction of the arrow and his condition.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is firmly embedded and he does not obey the order to extract it, then you should administer probes around the arrow as we have recommended, and subsequently treat the area until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the arrow is already hidden in the body and has escaped detection by sensation, you then probe for it, and if you feel it, you now direct it towards some instrument which is suitable for its extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow shaft, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein here, then incise around the wound so that it is enlarged and the arrow can be extracted.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is held by the ears with those parts attached to it, then remove the flesh in which it is embedded as completely as you can; and work on this, if you cannot avoid cutting through the flesh at the fracture of the ears and twisting them until it comes out.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow from wherever it is, then use twisting with your hand and forceps in all ways until it obeys; and carefully with the utmost care that the arrow does not break and that it be made easier to attract it and extract it.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot manage this at your current time, then leave it for several days until the parts around it become less swollen and try again when the situation is more favorable.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if there is an adverse flow of blood, then you administer what we have said about treatment in the relevant chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard against cutting into veins or nerves, or tendons, and administer treatment in every possible way to avoid cutting the arrow; do this with ease, calmness, patience, and firmness as I have advised you.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	Therefore, you should bend the probe according to the figure of the patient's condition so that the fire of the cautery may be applied to it in a more beneficial manner.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If that is not possible for you, now administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	However, for probes that are removed in the opposite direction from the other side, or if you have already processed some part of them outwardly, or if there is hardness near the end of the probe due to tissue above the bone being pressed and you lift that area; then you cut it there. The cutting should be according to the quantity taken by the forceps, and then pull out what has been cut since it will now be lighter in this way.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	However, if it is retained in the bone, now twist the probe in the opposite direction to which the probe entered into the bone, and widen as you remove it, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for several days, and then attempt to remove it when the condition improves.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the probe is in it, now push it out with force.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	However, if the shaft is embedded and you want to administer pressure, now insert and use it, if it is blunt, a concave instrument so that it fits into the curvature of the probe's head and then push it out with force.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	However, if the probe is concave, now push it out with a strong instrument by inserting it into the probe, for the probe will be easier to remove with this.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the bandage is poisoned, then you should change all the flesh in which it was placed, if that is possible for you, and afterward treat it with what seems appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the bandage sticks to the feet, or to the belly, or to the bladder, or to the side, and is so adhered that you touch it with the probe, and if it is possible for you to cut over it, then cut over it and guard against cutting into a vein or nerve, and extract it, and afterward treat the wound as seems necessary, and cure it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps with which bandages are removed:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the ends of them be shaped like the beak of a bird so that when they grasp the bandage, they do not let go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from these are made special hooks, large and small, according to the size of the bandage and its thinness or thickness, and according to the width of the wound and its constriction.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of an impelling concave at this end curved like the claw of a bird so that it aids in the instrument entering the bandage, and the push of this hook:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of an impelling hook at the end:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Like a rod so that it aids in the instrument entering the curved bandage and is pushed with it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	About phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for phlebotomy of which the blood is commonly drawn are as follows: xiii in number, and there are sixteen in the head. Among these are two pulsating veins close to the ears, called alhasisain; two veins that appear on each temple; and two veins near the tear ducts under each eye, which are called aspicientz; a vein located at the middle part of the forehead; a vein at the tip of the nose; two veins in the neck; two veins on the upper lip; and two veins on the lower lip; — these latter are called algelic; — and there are also two veins beneath the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	Here are the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms: one of these is cephalic, and it is called wild rose; and people call it "the vein of the head," and sordas, and it is a median vein, and it is composed of one branch of basilica, and another branch of cephalic; and they name that one people "vein of the whole body"; and basilica is a vein which is placed on domestic rose, and it is called "cubital," and common people call this one "vein of the belly"; and flexor of the arm, and it lies over the humerus, and it is in that one in which bloodletting is performed, and it appears above the wrist by a manifest appearance; and savattella, and it is the vein that is between the thumb and the smallest finger, and it runs along both sides.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the ankle there are three veins: one of these is behind the curvature of the elbow of the wild rose; and the second is sophena, and its place is behind the heel of the domestic rose; and the sciatic vein, and its place is behind the heel of the wild rose; and in the ankle there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The treatment of the veins near the ears is for catarrhs, chronic illnesses, emigrations, scabs, and old ulcers of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those veins is as I recommend to you: it should be done at the top of the patient's head, and the patient's head should be rubbed in the occipital area where both veins are with a large cloth with good friction; then strengthen the patient by holding their neck with a bandage so that the two veins and their locations near the ears appear in two places on the back of the head; and you must do this with your thumb, and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your finger, here is when to proceed.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Take the lancet knife, and that is the one you should use, and then insert it below the vein into the bone until the blood flows to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then raise your hand with the vein and the bone to the upper parts and incise the vein with an appropriate incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be as much as two fingers adjusted or around that amount; and let the blood flow out as much as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then apply powder and apply it there until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already in the beginning of the book, the incision of those and their cautery have been described.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But for the two arteries, the purpose of phlebotomy is to treat migraines from ancient origins and severe evil headaches and persistent acute discharges to the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those is as I recommend to you: instruct the patient to move their arm until the two veins become visible by clear appearance and feel the pulse below your finger; then proceed to test.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then raise the bone above the vein to the upper parts with your finger, and insert the phlebotomy incision below, and lift the vein up; and incise it as you did with the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then loosen the patient's restraint, and place your finger on the vein for one hour; then place it on that spot and apply powder and bind it tightly above with firm pressure, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	Thus is preceded the remembrance of them, and from that the incision, and the traction at the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus the benefit of phlebotomy from the vein of the forehead is appropriate for phlebotomy from the cephalic vein in ancient diseases of the face and to migraines, stiffness, and foul-smelling ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the phlebotomy is as I recommend to you; so that the patient should sit with their arm bound in a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a fleam, whose shape is as follows:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the puncture point at the tip of the fleam above that vein and press it down with the hand or for another reason in the manner described, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you desire; and then release the patient from the procedure and bind that area until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And in some cases, it is opened with a phlebotomy on the lat (side), but it is not necessary for the phlebotomy to be sharp like other phlebotomies; rather, it should be blunt. Perform that phlebotomy acrosswise since the bone is close and strong, and it would easily break if the phlebotomy were too fine.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	But the benefit of the two veins that run along the tear ducts of both eyes is for treating itching of the eyes, stiffness, and excessive secretion in the eyes, and also for diseases of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient sits with their arm bound in a bandage, and then you perform the phlebotomy on those veins while you are standing over the patient's head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And let phlebotomy be performed transversely along a short stretch, for in that place there is no flesh; and if the vein is fine, the extremity of it will easily break off.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and pause on those knots, and strengthen them for one night, and then release them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	But phlebotomy of the nasal vein is beneficial for acute fever and violent chills, and for diseases of the face and migraines and stiffness that occur in the face, especially when they are chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient holds their own neck and then with your left hand hold their nose at its midpoint, and take a fine lancet and place it in the middle of the head of the nose along a straight line, for the vein does not appear to the touch here, and the blood will begin to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Move your hand slowly and gradually with the small phlebotomy tool and let the blood flow according to your need; then bind it for one night, for it is quickly restored.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	But the harm of phlebotomy on the two veins can lead to constriction of the eyes and the beginning of leprosy and many diseases and impetigo and severe corrosive ulcers, as well as herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of those veins is that the patient holds each one below their own neck with a band; and let the practitioner stand over the patient's head, and let the patient sit on a chair.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Regarding phlebotomy of the long vein, make a small incision gradually larger as needed; and draw blood according to the season or quantity required by necessity; and then treat the other veins similarly.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then remove the bandage and gently separate the two veins at the constriction so that the patient is not overly distressed, and leave it inside until the illness is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And for the benefit of phlebotomy of the larger veins, it applies to small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers, and fissures, as well as bad ulcers that occur in the nose and its surroundings.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of phlebotomy for these veins is that you should have the patient facing you, and secure their neck with a bandage. Then, pull back the lips to examine two veins: one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; the identification of each is by the darkness of each vein, and this is especially true because in the area around them are small black veins. At that point, you should incise each vein carefully.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if you are in doubt and do not know which one it is, then proceed with the incision of the larger of the two veins, and from the more evident pus.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And treat the two veins that are above the lips similarly.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	However, it is more common to incise the two veins that are below the lip rather than those above.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But for the two veins that are below the tongue, the benefit is in phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for headaches, diseases of the uvula, and illnesses of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	Of the quality of phlebotomy in that it follows the patient between your thighs before the sun, and raise his tongue, and look below his tongue, on one side of the vein and on the other side of the vein, and the color of each tends towards blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then phlebotomize each one; and be careful not to proceed too far in the phlebotomy of these, for below these are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are phlebotomized in the bend where it is customary to do so in all men, and the phlebotomy of these is done in two ways, either they place a phlebotomy mirror with a blue or olive color tending towards subtlety; or use a sharp knife for phlebotomy, and feel if it hurts, and this is the form of it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this pain indicates that the incision should be made according to their special side and subtlety, depending on the width of the veins and the tightness of these.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of phlebotomy mirror:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Let the cuts be made as needed, and it is appropriate to open the veins that are concave, full, and have obvious thick roots, and those that contain thick clotted blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the method of olive veinotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this veinotomy is of lesser width and has a more delicate tip, and it is appropriate for veinotomy of finer veins that contain thin, clear blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	But the benefit of veinotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: for it extracts blood from diseases that burden the head and neck, and from what dries the legs and abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is appropriate for the phlebotomist, when performing veinotomy on that vein, to be very careful with it and to act with great caution, as there is an artery nearby. If he makes a mistake in the puncture of the veinotomy, he may cut into that artery and cause excessive bleeding. Therefore, one should not perform veinotomy on it with a sharp instrument but rather with a cutter like scissors.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear clearly, then it is necessary to leave that one and switch to another, or seek any branch that might be present; or perform veinotomy at the end of the arm, as this vein is clear there. And cut that with a veinotomy cutter as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	But if you want the veinotomy of the median cubital vein, then it is necessary, before the constriction of the arm, to touch the location between where you know the location of the wrists, and then press over a firm area; and then stretch the arm and cut the vein in a concave manner with a veinotomy cutter as we have said; and be careful not to injure the artery by pressing too hard in some spaces near its location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you see, as you bandage the cloth, swelling in the place that you marked with a probe, then that swelling is an inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid that.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flow during phlebotomy as thin as a child's urine, and the blood is fine and thin, then you know it is arterial blood; and then you cut and pause your hand above that for a long period of time; and soon after, press your hand there, and if the blood is cut off, how many times it has been cut off, then you bandage the arm and leave it like that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And keep the patient away from any mucus coming from them, and let them be in overcautious fear of it and do not allow that for several days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the blood is not cut off and you are without proper medical assistance, then you should incise the artery if it appears to you; because the extremity of them is contracted, and the blood has been cut off; or take a piece of cloth, and fold that, and take one half and bandage that around the place where the vein is constricted with a tight bandage and with powders on the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And now if the blood is cut off, it is good; and if not, then treat that with what has been prescribed for stopping the flow of blood at the location of the powders.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the cutting off of their blood is difficult in many conditions due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of bandaging the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But for the dark vein, phlebotomy is helpful in extracting blood from the upper part of the head and from below the chest; as we have said, this is composed of parts of basilicum and parts of cephalicum.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	Here is the translation:
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should divide the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of performing phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it attracts blood from the head and relieves eye diseases.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And here precisely, if you want the phlebotomist to puncture either the olive vein or the myrtle vein; for it is the safest of all veins, as it is neither close to an artery nor a nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is necessary for you to know that when performing phlebotomy, you should avoid puncturing the head of the lizard vein alone, and instead seek a place farther away, and do not notice it unless it is apparent from the first percussion that there are some phlebotomy sites around it.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, it is often the case that an abscess exists in some people, even though phlebotomy was not performed on them in the first attempt, and you should not neglect to address that abscess.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	However, the quality of the phlebotomy performed on that vein and its subsequent effects require careful consideration for their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is about understanding that phlebotomy should be administered only for the preservation of health and as a precaution against the onset of diseases. It should be performed on one of the veins located in the arm, which are: cephalic, basilic, and (likely referring to another vein). Phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in both spring and autumn, and in winter near mealtime when signs of congestion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And let phlebotomy be performed when the third hour has passed since the first pus appeared.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	And let phlebotomy be administered whenever convenience and necessity require it, by night or day, at any hour and at any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is not appropriate to perform phlebotomy on a child until they are fourteen years old, nor on a woman who is pregnant before the fourth month and after the seventh, and elderly women who have passed sixty years should not be bled.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wishes to be bled by some method, it is appropriate for them to cleanse their bowels before phlebotomy with a laxative enema if there is retained fecal matter in them, so that the veins do not redirect excess fluids to the phlebotomized areas, which are purified, and so they do not burden the principal limbs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not bleed patients who are suffering from severe nausea and drunkenness, nor those in the early stages of illness or intoxication until these conditions have subsided, nor those with dropsy. Also, phlebotomy should be avoided near the onset of colic, vomiting, and abdominal issues, as well as after excessive labor, exercise, fasting, or vigilance, and from any cause that weakens either bodily or animal spirits.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And before considering phlebotomy, take into account the subtlety of the humors, especially if the blood is thick, by means of food and drinks, and medicines if that is possible.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And before proceeding, take a bath if there is no prohibiting cause, or exercise in some way to make the blood thinner.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	At the pause of bloodletting on that day, it is about the hour of terce, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And you should ensure that the day of that operation is guarded from all harmful animal incidents, such as bites, anger, fear, and from all physical exertions, such as excessive work and pain, and similar risks.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at their bedside, one should have present the causes of pleasant aromas and scents, as well as balms and similar items in quantities according to what is possible.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And the bloodletter should sit on a chair that is higher than the chair of the person who needs to be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then draw back their arm, and clean it with his hand twice or three times; and then tighten the tourniquet with a strap and wrap it around twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And the constriction should be timely, for if the constriction is not equal or if it is excessive, then it prevents the flow of blood; or if it is too loose, then it allows the blood to flow improperly.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And after the constriction, have the person who is to be bled rub their hands together vigorously among themselves until the veins are swollen and become clearly visible.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the bloodletter anoints their lancet with a little proper olive oil; and then places the index finger of their left hand on that vein, at the place where the bleeding is intended, so that the vein retreats slightly, and the percussion is firm because among the veins there are those that feel like a fleeing cord for bleeding, and these are full of air, and when you press the lancet onto that one it contracts away from the lancet, and the bloodletter is deceived; and the lancet does not pierce the vein, and if it does, that one is narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, let the phlebotomist be fixed in place and attentive to all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And immediately after the phlebotomy, if the vein is open in one place, that is good; but if not, then try another place, or wait a little while and return to it later, especially if there is inflammation at that location.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area is abscessed or if there is pus, then you should leave it for one day or two, and do not bind it tightly, because it will strongly attract an abscess if bound too tight, nor should you enter a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the incision is small and blood flows gently, and you fear that it will not yield the amount of blood you want, then repeat the phlebotomy at that spot carefully and adjust the incision slightly, and do this quickly before the location becomes abscessed, because the location often becomes abscessed with just a slight incision.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if you see that it is already abscessed, then do not repeat the procedure there, because it will be of no benefit to you; and apply some part of the mixture of oil on it, as it facilitates the flow of blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And in this case, oil is better than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, administer a mixture of oil in every phlebotomy where you phlebotomize veins that are difficult for blood to flow through, and use this mixture when you pause from one of them on the location, because the blood is refined and becomes thin when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the place of phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, which happens often, especially to those who have not been bled recently or only slightly, and then you come upon it, apply a sponge infused in water and salt, slightly heated, and leave that on for one hour, because it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And cover that with the dressing of the blood from that vein or from another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if after some days in that place there remains any blackness or greenness, do not be concerned about it; and if you wish, apply to it some poultice of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some preparation of mint juice or calamine or something similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And often there occur abscesses and swellings that require phlebotomy from the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And so place your hand on that area, and if you find softness upon compression on it, then that swelling is bad; and then be careful not to apply any of the things we have mentioned to it, for blood may easily flow from an artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply a plaster that has astringent properties to harden the area, and treat it with the other methods until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And it is necessary to draw blood from a person according to the quantity of their strength and according to the color appearing on top of the blood as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, then let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see it thick, then let it flow until it becomes thinner; and likewise, if it is acute, until the sharpness of it is reduced.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	For those who are healthy and strong and have a need for bloodletting at one time, the phlebotomy of the vein should be increased and let the bleeding be slow.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for those who are frail, do the opposite of that, and let it be done in small amounts at different times, and let the bleeding be quick.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best method to use in venous phlebotomy is transverse section, not puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy is safe from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more effective and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And for those who are accustomed to fainting due to phlebotomy, you should cure them before the phlebotomy with a little bread infusion instead of lemon seeds or simple oxymel heated; and extract the blood in three or four sessions.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if they are anemic, then take before the phlebotomy bread infusion in syrup of myrrh or in aromatic honey seasoned with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or in a fragrant and sweet syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs due to phlebotomy and is caused by the loss of sweet blood, then take drinking water of meat and a subtly fragrant syrup; and use aromatics with sugar, and let them drink it immediately.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting due to evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And for one who wishes to open the vein and dissolve his blood for a second time, it is appropriate according to that which phlebotomy is for mild evacuation, and the strength of it is fenugreek, which gradually evacuates the blood in small amounts, as is according to the quantity of the strength over continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	And for one who wishes to open the vein and take out his blood for a second time, and whose body is strong, he should do this about seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But for one who wishes to draw the blood from his body in the opposite direction from the side toward which it inclines, it should be opened on the second day or the third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But in the case where there is already hot and thick blood that causes fever, it should be drawn once in large quantities until fainting occurs, while maintaining all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on the pulse to prevent death instead of fainting, as this often happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And when you wish to open the vein and evacuate the blood for a second time, since the orifices of the vein are already closed and it is difficult for the blood to flow out, do not press too forcefully or bend it abruptly, as this is harmful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Handle the area carefully so that it can be phlebotomized a second time; or massage that place with the heat of the phlebotomy that has caused coagulation in the vein's orifice; or apply something of turpentine, or sage, and press gently until the blood is out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, at that time do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood secondarily, and there is no excuse, then bleed that person in that place or in the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And when the vein called "the rope of the arm" is incised instead of the fossa or basilica, if they are not obstructed or hidden, because it is composed of them.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the phlebotomy there is that the patient inserts his hand in cold water until the finger turns red and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then apply pressure on that part with a tight bandage; and then perform phlebotomy according to the small transverse vessel, not laterally or longitudinally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the incision be wide, and let your phlebotomy on that which you phlebotomize over the joint of the hand be a little bit.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then put your hand in cold water and let the blood run in the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from putting your hand in cold water, and similarly, cooling the blood in cold water is paused during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because here there is no pulsating vein or nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the vein on the right hand is appropriate for diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you tie your hand or someone else's hand, after placing it in hot water until the vein is swollen and clearly visible to the observer; then cut across that vein; and if you do not incise it entirely, this will not be effective.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And do not release your hand after the phlebotomy, for leave it so that the nerves of the aforementioned area bare of flesh are exposed.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then immerse your hand again in the hot water and let the blood flow freely there, for if you do not immerse it again in the hot water, the blood will clot at the opening of the vein, and the flow will be obstructed.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is extracted in the required quantity, then press on the vein with oil and salt, so that it does not seal up immediately; and similarly, you should do this for all such procedures.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the benefit of the phlebotomy of the vein on the left hand is that it is appropriate for diseases of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in this phlebotomy as you have done in the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of the cephalic vein in phlebotomy is for diseases that affect the lower part of the body, such as disorders of the uterus, and for retention of menstruation, and for diseases of the joints and ulcers of old wounds, and similar ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	Of the quality of phlebotomy it is that the patient immerses his arm in warm water and makes friction thereon until the veins appear; and he places a cord above the joint of the arm where it bends, and the place of the vein to be opened is apparent below the said joints, and from this spot branches extend over the surface of the arm like little branches.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And so, phlebotomize the largest branch below the bend beneath the joint of it, for it is better and more effective.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you phlebotomize that on the surface of the arm, then be careful of the nerves which are below that on the surface of the arm, and pause your phlebotomy when you feel one, as if you wanted to cut across it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And so the phlebotomy is completed.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the emission of blood is prohibited; then immerse the arm of the patient in warm water and allow the blood to flow there until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist errs on the first attempt, then repeat the phlebotomy slightly above or below it, for the location is effective; and do not fear this error, but be cautious of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly do the phlebotomy of the other arm in the same manner.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, the location as we have said is below the joint behind the thigh.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the benefit of phlebotomy is to alleviate pain in the hip when it is caused by excess blood.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	Of the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient enter into bath, and hasten and tighten the skin of him at the breadth between above the heel above four fingers in a bandage thin, for it appears not save by this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then you phlebotomize that according to each angle that is possible and according to the transverse, and it is better; or incise that by incision or sever that by section, for the place of him is salt.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in words a man weak; and if you find that, and it does not appear to the sense of all, then phlebotomize some branch of him, and it is that which appears on the back of the hand behind the finger auricular and the finger anular.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And beware of the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity that you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then loosen the bandage and pause over the place of the phlebotomy cotton and tighten the place, for lightly it is healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of bleeding and of the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Bleeding is usually from veins, or arteries, or vessels.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And bleeding is done according to two methods: one of them is by incision and extraction of blood, and the other is bleeding without incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this bleeding that is without incision is according to two methods, for it can be with heat or without heat.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And for the veins that are usually administered with incision and extraction of blood there are fourteen locations on the body, among which one in which bleeding is paused is called alnocrati, and it is at the back part of the head; and another location is near both sides of the neck; and bleeding from the chin below the jaw next to the mouth; and bleeding from the two cheeks; and bleeding from alohoster, which is above the earlobe; and bleeding from two small veins, one on each arm; and bleeding from two tendons; and bleeding from two skin areas.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Of bloodletting do not extract the blood except from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and by that you do not capture the virtue through those, just as it happens with phlebotomy; nor is it necessary for bloodletting to be done near fire or without fire in any disease caused by retention until the entire body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If necessity prompts bloodletting due to illness or continuously, administer that at any time at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it and at some times.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The reason for this is that in certain individuals, blood is multiplied within them to such an extent that it becomes necessary to extract it through bloodletting; and in those people, you find heaviness and congestion in their head. Of these, you notice retention and hardness in their face and head, and neck. And of others, you notice a pale complexion on their face and forehead, with darkness and dullness in their eyes. And there are those whose bloodletting site is congested; and among them, their laughter is excessive; and of some, you find a taste of blood in their mouth, or their tongue is coated and they spit blood. And of others, their sleep is multiplied, and there are those who see blood during sleep, along with rigors, fevers, and other similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And when you encounter any of those causes, and particularly if it is in the third or middle of the month, I command that bloodletting be done after two or three hours have passed from midday.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	The benefit of bloodletting from the neck is that when it alleviates heaviness in the head and what causes sinking of the eyes; but it should be done close to when the entire body is evacuated.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this incision is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic region.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not appropriate to use that which is of full circumference, or in which there is a catarrh, because it causes great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for that reason, it is not advisable to use those that are old, and in which there are usually chronic illnesses.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But if it continues to be applied continuously over it, forgetfulness may occur; and for that reason, you should command the operator to pause their hand a little above the cup at the edges, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But cupping on the nape is in the place of phlebotomy of the dark vein and the basilic vein: and for that reason, it benefits asthma, constriction of breathing, rupture of the respiratory organ, coughing, and congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is necessary for the cup on the nape to be raised a little, because if it is placed lower, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And cupping on the back of the head benefits pain in the head and ophthalmia, headache, nasal congestion, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And it is necessary to command the cupper not to press his hand near the incision so that he does not injure the artery and cause a flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And cupping below the chin benefits alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and symptoms similar to those diseases that are in the mouth, and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the alheric vein which is on both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	Make the ventilation which is made with the two spatulas according to the caphtan, which is made by an abundance of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the ventilation of the two parts inside the focus should be done with vigor for the phlebotomy of three veins, which are the basilic, fusca, and cephalic, because it attracts the blood from all those larger veins that are in the flesh, and these smaller veins from other thicker veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the ventozator not to proceed with incision, because the area is bare of flesh, and leave it so as not to harm the nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a ventosa with which one applies suction over the hemorrhoids and uses it for ulcers while leaving them exposed.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And it is necessary to command the ventozator to use a large ventosa and let it be of medium size, because the area you are treating requires strong suction; and after applying powerful suction with larger ventosas, use smaller ones gently and perform incisions.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Use ventosas of the smaller kind with meticulous care, for they draw blood from the entire body, and apply them to chronic pains in the loins and back, and to the bladder; they also induce menstruation and are used for bothriosis and ademil; and they serve as a substitute for phlebotomy of two saphena veins, alahorcoben, and two cavilha.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, they weaken the entire body and can cause syncope in some people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And for the alahorcoben ventosas, the vigor applied should be proportional to the vigor used with the two-sided ventosas.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	Regarding the quality of the position of the cupping vessels, place the cupping vessel at the beginning and draw it off promptly, and do not prolong the position of the cupping vessels, but place them gently, and leave them cautiously, so that the humors come to the site by event.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the area turn red and swell, and the hardness of the blood becomes apparent.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Now you should make small incisions and repeat the suction gradually, and then carefully observe the condition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For the person with tender flesh and few pores should be scarified only once, not repeatedly, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And instruct the cupper to enlarge the scarification slightly and prolong it a little, and apply suction with ease and facility.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thick, then it is necessary to scarify twice, because in the first session the path for the subtlety of the blood and its moisture is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second session, proceed with the acquired scrutiny for extracting the thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is murky and contains impurities, then perform the third scarification so that it achieves the desired result.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or in small amounts, one scarification is sufficient for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a large amount of blood, we perform extensive scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to perform prolonged scarification.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	Regarding the term of incision, in which the depth of the cut is only so much.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the one whose cut is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are narrow, it is necessary that the areas for cupping be anointed with soothing, opening, and resolving oils; if it is in summer, such as aloes oil or violet oil, or olive of mustard seeds, or chickpea oil; and if it is in winter, narcissus oil, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or blood oil, and similar ones.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick and congealed, then the oil should be henna oil, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the cupping vessel has wide pores of tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and for this, the areas around where the cups will be applied should be washed with rose water or cold water mixed with solutrum, or chickpea water, or borretia water, and similar ones.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for the one whose blood is of thick moisture, wash their cupping areas with vinegar water, or with water of myrtle and sumac, and similar ones.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for the one whose excesses are thick, wash their cupping areas with old vinegar, or with water of savory, which is marjoram, or of anise decoction, or chamomile, and similar ones.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it is necessary that the cupping be done before bathing; it should be administered immediately after bathing within an hour or two, and it is advisable to rest after the cupping.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is needed so that bleeding may be regulated after phlebotomy before cupping.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Consider this at the beginning: if the venesectionist or the one who needs to be bled is choleric and there is wind over the hot blood with inflammation, then it should be that he takes cooling causes, such as sour grapes, endive in vinegar, lettuce, saffron, and julep, and things similar to these.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause their food such as poultry, and meat of suitable birds, and foods seasoned with acids, and things similar to these.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for the one whose constitution is cold, he should drink rose syrup, or syrup of saffron from seeds, and sumac, and a mixture of moderate strength between noon and night; and it should be recommended to him to use little drinking and eating, and to pause foods such as poultry and canaries and sparrows and small birds and dove.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it should be that on the day of venesection and bleeding, drinking should be more than food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it should be given to drink at certain times to some people theriac alpharab, or medicine of musk, which is nutmeg, or alcelita before venesection or bleeding or afterwards, so that the principal members are comforted and that the blood becomes refined; and they should not take those hot substances.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	However, the venesections that should be done without incision should be performed on areas above the abdomen, over the liver and spleen, and at the navel, in the places of the ribs, and the pectoral region, because these members cannot tolerate incisions.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And this is not sought by those means but rather attraction of blood from a limb, just as we use a cupping glass on the breast in the disease of flux of blood from the nose; and they use that to dissolve the flatulence which inflames and thickens the limb, just as we apply it to the abdomen and navel; for that rarefies the limb and heats it up and removes the pain by resolving flatulence.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is applied to the sinuses when they are obstructed or diseased, for by virtue of attraction it raises obstructions and eradicates the disease from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly it does when applied to the liver and bile due to flatulence, which is enclosed within them.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these cupping glasses are administered only with suction; and some are applied over fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some cupping glasses are administered filled with hot water in diseases of the bile.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is so that the cupping glass may be full and larger; it can be hot water alone or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of the cupping glass administered over fire: let the width of the opening be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of its body shall be half a palm; and in the middle of it, in the place that is in the circuit, let it be half of it, the thickness shall be small according to the amount that fits inside a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made of ox horn or citrus, with thick edges, lion skin, sealskin, and smooth so that it does not hurt the limb due to its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And place a candle across the middle of the lamp or iron, where it is set by the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this large suction device is greater than the one we have recommended; and its size should be adjusted according to the illness and the condition of the person using it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the suction devices for children and those who are weak should be different from those used by young and strong individuals.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this suction device over the fire on the limb is to extend the tube over the wood fire moderately in front of a small candle made of wax, and place it at the middle part of the cross bar in the proper location of the suction device, so that the flame is lit around the lower part without burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And it should be placed on the patient's limb, and the tube should be on the area we have mentioned, such that when we have the suction devices and do not want to hold the tube and allow the vapor to rise over that area, the suction device will dissolve quickly.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And light the tube according to its method, and repeat this if you need to use it again.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	But in the suction device used for treating pleurisy, it is filled with water, in which there is no crossbar or tube, and it is administered only by being filled with water and placed on the limb.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: This suction device should be larger in size, as it can receive a greater amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter xcviij.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting should not be administered in movable parts but in those members where it is impossible to apply cupping because of their smallness, such as the gums and similar areas; or on fleshless parts, such as the fingers and nose and similar areas.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those leeches that you have found in the clear waters downstream from clean places.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then leave them in clear water day and night until they are hungry, so that no cause remains in their belly; and then evacuate the body at the beginning of phlebotomy and cupping; and then rub the patient's limb until it reddens; and then place them on the affected area.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and satisfied.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if suction from the area with cupping is possible, it is better for improvement.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, now wash the area with warm water and then with moving water; and it should be rubbed and squeezed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the blood vessels near the leech bites become extended and there is residual blood, now place a cloth on cold water, and apply it until the residue is absorbed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is flowing excessively, now sprinkle powdered vitriol or other astringent powders on it until the bleeding stops; or place masticated fava beans on the area, and leave them until the beans stick to the area, and the bleeding stops.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	In case it is necessary, repeat the application of leeches, when it is possible to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the leeches are prohibited from suspending, at that time it should be washed with fresh blood or place a needle in the spots until blood flows; and then they should be paused, for those which feel any blood will immediately stop.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to stop, powder over those a little of ground aloe, or salt, or ash, and they will stop immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the chapter of the third part: on restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is repeatedly necessary in the art of medicine; it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations, accidents involving the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, be aware that those who boast about this chapter are foolish doctors and the unlearned, as well as those who for some time have not regarded the books of the Ancients or read a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is done that this method of the scientists in our land is private; and I have not forgotten it for any length of time, nor have I acquired what follows except through prolonged reading of the books of the Ancients and studying to understand them, from which I extracted their knowledge.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then I directed myself to experimentation and study throughout the duration of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter everything that contains my knowledge and upon which I have passed my experience; now I abbreviate it for you to free it from the occupation of lengthiness; and I abbreviate it at the end of abbreviation; and I show it at the end of clarification; and form many forms of the instruments used in that, as is done by addition of explanation, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	A summary and collection of what is necessary for the treatment of fractures of bones, from which a preliminary understanding is required before we begin to recall the parts of broken limbs and their various types.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us begin with the prologue of this chapter by summarizing the discourse; and the chapters will be such that at their beginning it is necessary for the practitioner to stand firm in the truth of them; so that you and those like you, who wish to know or learn this noble art from others, may do so promptly.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And so I say that when it happens to someone to have a fracture or dislocation or torsion or fall, at that moment it is necessary for you to decide at the beginning whether to perform venesection or to bandage them, or both simultaneously, unless some cause prohibits it, such as weakness of strength, or if it is a child who has happened to them, or an elderly person in debility, or if it is a time of extreme heat or cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And let them be content with food that is light, such as fresh herbs and the meat of birds and small animals; we prohibit fatty meats and foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are sure that there will be no abscess or pus formation, and if you do not fear an effusion of matter into the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And now return the patient to their original regimen, which they were accustomed to before.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And so when the broken bone begins to be restored, now it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious foods that are moist and heavy, in which there is viscosity, such as food made from boiled wheat with water, rice, peas, beef tripe, hens, fresh pork, and similar foods, and with this regimen the healing of the fracture occurs more easily and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that the bones in children as well as in old age and in the first year of life cannot be set or consolidated by nature through the drying up of the members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are set and consolidated by nature at all times through the drying up of those members, and they remain set and consolidated until the end of their softness, just as the bones of small infants do.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature adjusts and applies them around the broken bone for all parts due to a cause similar to glue, in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens until they are completely conjoined, until they come to an end of strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, without any cause prohibiting it from completing its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to avoid heavy foods and viscous foods that are thick, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The variety of fractures depends on the variety of the member.  
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for the fracture of the bone of the arm is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the thigh; and similarly all the other members are different among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And you will find a description of every kind of fracture, explained in its own separate chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	There is diversity in the nature of fractures themselves.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the types of bone fractures are diverse in themselves; for one type of curved fracture is different from those that occur in the stars; and some fractures are made according to the length of the bone: and among the fractures of the shaft and splinters and non-continuous breaks, just as it is done when a pen is prepared for writing, there is a fracture due to plague and disruption in the head, and there is a small crack fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And each type has its own proper treatment in the restoration, of which there will be a separate recall in their respective places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	There is a sign of a bone fracture. 
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by water it is known whether there is a fracture of the bone: its twisting, and that elevation and appearance which are felt by touch, and what happens when you press on it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when there is no visible twisting or swelling, it must be done by touch: when you touch the bone with movement and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	There might be twisting or a small fissure, therefore do not press that with your hand and by compression of the whole area; however, place something upon it from among the medicines which are mentioned shortly before the moment when you will treat the location; and nearby it should be narrow due to subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you should know that the place where it is bent and not split into two or more of those that do not occur in its damage, as is described throughout this part of its comparison, then you should begin from your time to correct it, provided there is an abscess near it.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if there is an abscess near it, then leave that for some days until the abscess subsides; and afterward bandage it in whatever way you can with lightness and care.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And you should know that the restoration and alignment of it are easier than for the bone in which such damage occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen that according to what will be recalled next.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if there is swelling in the bone due to damage, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from both parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or by your hand if the member is small; or by two cords or one cord and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And let your position be such that you place the limb in a location equal to its natural figure, while the parts so extended from the broken limb compel you to return those additions to their origin and according to each way that you can in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful according to your strength that no harm falls upon the patient because of your operation or injury; and compel yourself according to your ability to apply one bone to its companion bone according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is fitting that at that opportune moment you touch with your hand that which needs attention, and if you find any divergent cause, correct that and equalize it according to the measure of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive extension and compression, just as some foolish surgeons often cause an abscess to occur due to their operation, or cause contraction in the limb as we have seen happen due to their careless operations.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And promptly attach, promptly equalize and perform a proper operation and constriction of that limb, and rest and tranquility; warn the patient about this and help them avoid anything that might harm it during their waking hours and while sleeping, and observe its movement and agitation, and manage all its movements with utmost care; and wait until the position of the limb is such that it ensures no pain, which often occurs due to an improper disposition of the painful or injured limb. Now it is necessary to change that limb to another disposition in which there is no pain; and be careful that this position is correct and equal, so that the limb does not suffer from curvature when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the constriction of the tranquilized limb is what I recommend; for you to know that broken limbs vary in their smallness and magnitude and in the form of each one.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small like the arm and the hand and the finger and similar to these, then the wrapping should be of soft fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And for those that are thick like the thigh or the calf, it is necessary that in these a wrapping of leather and something hard be used, because the leather wrapping connects the large and strong limb with tightness from all sides, so that nothing harmful can enter.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And immediately after you begin, after your evacuation of the wound, pause conveniently for this, on the place of that fracture with three wrappings or four as the limb requires; and tighten your hand a little with the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then bring it to the uppermost part of the place of the fracture, and tighten moderately so that your binding does not hurt the place where you have tightened the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then extend the wrapping of the place of the fracture a bit, and loosen the binding little by little, until you reach a large part of the area.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap that place of the fractured area again with a wrapping, and then go to the lower part of the wrappings from the fracture; and let your work be in tightening the binding and loosening it as we have said about the first wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then pause between the wrappings with a piece of cloth or linen on which the curvature of the fracture is equalized, if there is any curvature; and if not, do not pause for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then pause on the other bandage, and then apply plasters properly made shortly thereafter if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area, and at that time pause using what causes the abscess to form and reduces the swelling; and leave this for several days; and then you tighten over it the plasters.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	Let the splints for the middle of the reed shaft be well made skillfully; or let them be of oak wood; or of palm ribs; and let each splint be of this size and shape:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the splint that is placed over the fracture should be a little thicker and longer than the other splints, and the length of the splint according to how it fits the limb in size and smallness; then bind the splints together with a bandage as was described in your first dressing, and tie it above decently as we have said about dressing, and it should be that your dressing is tighter at the place of the fracture, and the farther it is from the fracture, the looser the binding.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And the threads should be of medium thickness and fineness, and they should be soft; if the threads are thick, as I have seen in some people's bandaging with cords made of twisted thread, it is a great mistake, for when you apply the dressing unevenly, it causes problems.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And similarly, very fine threads are not appropriate, for you will not achieve with the dressing what you want, and it should not be less than a finger's width between splint and splint.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient complains of pain at the ends of the splints near the dressing in those places, then place soft wool or knotted cloth underneath where it does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	In some cases, a fracture is accompanied by bruising, and there may be disruption in the bone, and I will recall this in that chapter according to its particular nature.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that not every broken limb is dressed with splints on the first day; the reason for this is that when the limb is large, it should not be placed on splints until about five or seven days later, or more, according to your certainty of the occurrence of swelling.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of the plasters with which the Ancients restored fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of a plaster made from bran for the restoration of fractures, suitable for complete bones and mostly for women and children, as it does not cause heat or irritation: take powdered bran, which is the fine flour that comes off the walls of the mill due to the movement of the millstones.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And prepare that as it is, but sieve it with egg white, and use the preparation neither too thick nor too thin.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method for a plaster that restores fractures, dislocations, and twists: recipe includes asafetida, lapidanum, acacia, hyssop, migraach (which is the seed of wild millet), each one drachm; myrrh and aloes each half a drachm; alochil two drachms. All should be powdered and sieved and mixed with almond water or egg white if the condition of the injury is hot; then use this plaster, as it has a good composition and restores broken bones quickly, suitable for men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method for a plaster to treat fractures and twists: recipe includes migraach (seed of wild millet) and myrtle bark each one drachm; myrrh and aloes each half a drachm; acacia six drachms; Armenian bole two drachms.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All should be powdered in a mortar with a crushing tool, then sieved, and mixed with water or egg white and applied.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of applying a plaster to joints and bones that have come out of their places, and for pain resulting from these and for cracks and fractures: take clean wool and immerse it in vinegar and warm oil and place it over the site.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	In this plaster, there is no restorative virtue, but it is useful for suppurating sores and properly expelling pains.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of a plaster that restores a broken bone: take leaves of the mulberry tree and leaves of the wild poppy; mix them all and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of a quick plaster to be administered after the restoration of a bone fracture and when you want resolution of remaining abscess: take root of plantain, of chamomile and flowers of violets, of flour of spelt, of each one part; mix all ground and boiled in vinegar, if the member is not inflamed.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is inflamed, now mix that with coriander water or with water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of a stronger plaster for resolution than the first one, when there is a hard abscess after the restoration of the limb: take root of plantain and seeds of linseed, and buckthorn, melilot, marjoram, flowers of violets, chamomile, of each equal parts; all should be ground and boiled in sage water or in warm water or in vinegar, whichever suits the condition of the limb and the color of it.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	But Hippocrates does not say in his book to apply it to the broken limb after its restoration except for wax made of wax and oil and nothing else; and recommends that it be midway between coarseness and fineness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May is used from Gaulish wine which it is seen that they place over the broken limb after restoration due to the drying effect of its slight heat just as myrrh, and similar to those causes which we have recounted.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of making a plaster for injury and pain: recipe using egg white, linseed, human hair cut or bird feather, oak bark, and salt, all in equal parts; they are ground, sifted, mixed together, and then made into a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The amount according to which it is necessary that the bandage remains and should then be loosened is such that you consider whether there has been no accident of pain or swelling, nor is the bone broken or displaced; therefore, do not loosen it for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there occurs severe pain or swelling at the site, then you should be cautious or loosen that bandage immediately, and remove the plaster from it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a piece of cloth and sea sponge soaked in warm water, and immerse it in cold water, with which you wash the affected area until the swelling subsides and the pain is alleviated; then let the limb rest for one hour; afterwards place on it pure wool submerged in vinegar and oil or scented oil, and bind it over it for a night until you are sure of no abscess formation, and that the swelling of the limb has subsided, and the pain from it is relieved.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then iterate that gentle wrapping and small plaster without tightening it as much as your first constriction, and gently treat it until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you find that the abscess and hardness and pain and swelling and all such occurrences have subsided completely, and you need a plaster and wrapping, then repeat that as you did at the beginning equally.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no cause occurs to the member of those we have mentioned, then you do not loosen it but after three or four or ten or seven days; and sometimes all this is left loose for twenty days according to what appears to you in the loosening of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it becomes accustomed to the coagulation of flesh over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And now adjust in the constriction more than in your first constriction entirely, and adjust according to the swelling of the patient's flesh, as was previously mentioned.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	But if you see the location of the fracture already drying and wasting more than is appropriate, then you will know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching it; therefore, apply tepid water to it every time you loosen it; do this for all three days; ease the constriction a little, and through this operation direct nutrition to the member, and it will be healed quickly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But what those foolish restorers of the fractured member do otherwise when it is not restored at the beginning as appropriate and is restored according to tortuous methods, is an error according to their operation, and a great fear, and if this were true, it would greatly enlarge what the Ancients wrote about it in their books and warned against.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do this, so it is more reasonable to assume that they do not do this.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter Second: On fractures when they occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a hard object, which removes all the bone inward to the suture, leaving behind only that part of the bone, just as it would in wood; thus this type is called an incisional fracture. Or a hard object cuts some part of the bone and cuts through the flesh but does not penetrate beyond the surface; this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	This is about the severity of these two fractures, either major or minor, and of a fracture that is comminuted or crushed; and the cause of it is percussion by something weak or falling on a stone, and similar circumstances.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating, which approaches the periosteum below the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the severity of these two fractures is either major or minor.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And this is a fracture that affects the bone in its subtlety, in the small fibers, and for this reason this particular type of fracture is called capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And this is a fracture that is caused either by falling or by being struck with a stone and similar circumstances, which causes some plate of the bone to enter into the soft parts inside, and it occurs in the concave location as well as when such things happen to the bones of the arm when they are struck and break inwardly.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this is more commonly done in the bones of children's bodies, just as with the heads of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And for all these types of fractures, treatments are used, which are remedies applied separately.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will return to the recall of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And you can recognize all these types of fractures by detection on them and by inquiry into their symptoms and the appearance of damaged flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary fracture is recognized by this: it appears on the bone, and when it is cleaned and examined with a probe, the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, consider at first the symptoms of the patient, and if you see from these symptoms that they signify by manifest indication fear, as is vomiting in anger, and stretching out, and loss of understanding, and hoarseness of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and similar such symptoms of the intestines and hardness of them, and likewise with other major dispositions, without doubt it will not be healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see unusual symptoms that give hope of health, then you begin the treatment of them.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause of which is clear if it comes to you as a complaint in the beginning as it is in winter days, then it is necessary that you study the condition of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all dispositions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then it is necessary that you wait to remove the bone before the seventh day, since what is around the bone may become corrupted by pus, and for the symptoms we have mentioned to occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the scalp covering the head and is in small pieces and scattered, then it is necessary that you incise the comminuted and scattered part as I will relate to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And you should shave the head of the patient who is injured, and uncover the bone according to custom and method as best as possible according to the shape of the injury, so that it is clear on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you that the detection of the bone, bleeding, or an abscess requires caution, then you must be careful with what is necessary, and it is that you cover the area with cloths infused in wine and rose oil, and allow the wound to rest until the abscess subsides, and you are sure there is no further bleeding; then proceed with circumferential treatment of the bone and its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	In this way it should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one method is that you cut the bone with an incisor of such and such a shape, and this is its form: And then apply another incisor to it, somewhat wider than that; and this is the form of it.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then apply an even wider incisor than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is necessary to have various incisors, some wider than others and some shorter than the rest; and their tips should be sharp, and they should be made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in percussion on the incisors so that you do not injure the head and cause pain to it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary to drill around it before you apply the incisors with the chisels, which are called non-profound chisels.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are called this only because these do not penetrate to the end of the bone of the head as far as what is adjacent to it, so that the chisel has a rounded tip or margin on top of which is the part below the head like a margin or small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take a great number of these chisels, each of which should be suitable for the sharpness of each bone, so that you are present with all the parts of the head where the tip is sharp, and the quantity in length and width should correspond to the sharpness of this part.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the form of three kinds of trephines: The quality of drilling in the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the trephine on the bone and rotate it with your hands until you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then move the trephine to another location, and continue this process throughout to the amount of the thickness of the rib or around there.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then incise with the scalpel what is between each piece of bone, and make it as fine as possible at the end for lightness, as we have said, until you remove the bone, either by hand or for some other reason due to preparations made for this purpose, such as tools like probes and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And you must be careful that the scalpel does not touch any part of the brain.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when you have circled the bone with perforations, it will be separated from the brain if it is continuous there, and you will extract it; you should smooth and equalize that in the roughness of what is in the bone using a tool similar to a scalpel, but it must be thinner and finer than other scalpels.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any small pieces of the bones remain and you are concerned about them, now take that with ease using the tools appropriate to you; and then treat the wound with lint and dressings as we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is light, distant from fear, which Guy of Chauliac greatly praised; and this is the speech about it: It is necessary for you at the beginning to start uncovering the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most severe, until when you have uncovered that part and you have placed below it the extremity of this slow and cheerful scalpel, whose form is as follows:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And so the lens-shaped part is solid and does not split for any reason, and the acute part splits it into two sides along its length, as you see; that the lens-shaped part fits to the bone with the cutting surface being sharp against the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And therefore strike with the saw on a small part to see if you can split all the bone with ease as it revolves, and be sure of the tissue that no accident happens in any way, and even if the physician were the most foolish of all people and the least knowledgeable among them; certainly, and even if he were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Now if any cause is attached to the bone of the tissue in some places of the bone, it will split that which is at the end of the saw that is lens-shaped, and deliver that which is with ease, for it is delivered without harm and without fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the tissue, and what is split off or remains of the bone is its surface, and it remains rough with small irregularities, now you should file that roughness and eradicate those irregularities with fine razors for which you have prepared in various quantities so that you can apply them appropriately at any location during your operation on the broken bone according to its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you should apply in your proportion at which you file the bone at the beginning with the broader of those razors, and then use progressively finer ones, and do not stop doing this continuously until you reach applying the thinnest and finest of all.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In each of the other small, slender fractures and subtle fractures, you should provide care according to what is required for their correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is true that not all who have studied in that art are capable.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And this is about what we have written concerning large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the fatty tissue is rectangular when you remove the bone, then take a piece of cloth according to the size of the wound, and immerse it in warm oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; then take another folded or triple-layered cloth and immerse it in wine and warm oil, and place it on top of the first cloth; and do this as lightly as possible so that you do not press on the swelling; and afterward apply a bandage to it, but tighten it only enough to cover the wound.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And keep it like this for one day or two until you are sure that no abscess will form; then loosen it and afterward administer medicines that are too drying, such as linseed poultice and flour of oats, and powder of vetches and of aristolochia, and similar ones.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you should make these medicines into a powder that is finely ground and apply them to the wound as dry powders; generally, administer any medicine whose property is to cleanse without irritating.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be careful according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment is clean; and it should not become infected or worse; nor should you allow its virulence to increase. For when it is pressed against the fatty tissue of the brain, it corrupts that and weakens it, and thus a serious illness may occur due to this malicious condition.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it affects the swelling of the head, as when the bone is cleaned and especially when pressure is applied to its treatment, and there is discoloration on its surface; and therefore consider whether it leads to the illness we have mentioned, knowing that it is harmful without any doubt.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if the darkness does not come from the medicine that is placed upon it, but rather from the virtue of that medicine which causes the darkness, then you should take one part honey and three parts rose oil, and with these anoint a cloth, and then place that over the wound; and thereafter treat it with the spices suitable for healing until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken in more than two parts at once above, or one of those rarely, because there are two bones there, since the part below is cartilaginous and does not break, but only ulceration, distortion, and swelling occurs to it.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you should introduce your finger into the socket of the nose, and align that fracture within with your middle finger, and press from outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this with ease, and be careful that your operation does not cause pain to the patient.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then it should be aligned at the end of a rod with some thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should proceed as described.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And attempt the restoration of it on the first day of the fracture if possible; and if not, then do so around the seventh or tenth day when the swelling has subsided.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Insert a piece of linen cloth into the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part, or two pieces if the fracture is in two parts, and let each piece be large enough to fill the cavity of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	One of the ancient restorers said that the pieces should be dipped in butter and changed every day, but I have not seen this done; however, it is advisable to dip the cloth in albumen from a cooked egg mixed with powder of flowers of malt; and then place it inside when the bone has set and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	In some cases, a piece of ox horn wrapped in linen cloth may be inserted into the nose instead of pieces of cloth, especially if the fracture of the nose is very severe and the patient is not prohibited from inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this method is not necessary for you; if you want to do it, do so, and if you prefer, use pieces of cloth.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another piece becomes inflamed, apply a plaster to the nose with cerate or cotton dipped in vinegar and rose oil, or with honey water.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if it does not become inflamed, now you should apply a plaster outside with sesame flour and powder of flowers mixed with egg white; and then place it over a linen pad, and do not treat the nose with any other substance.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or comminuted, now you should dissect around them and extract them with instruments suitable for that; and then close the wound, and treat it with substances that promote healing and consolidation, and with appropriate plasters.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if it happens that there is an abscess inside the nose, now you must treat it with poultices and administer lead tubes within so that it may be completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the lower jaw is broken and the fracture does not have an abscess, now observe if the fracture is only on the surface and not split into two parts and curved inward, then its diagnosis is easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And you should therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left thumb into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert your right thumb; and press against the swelling of the fracture inward with ease at the outer part with your other hand; thus gently restore it.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, now you should administer extension of both parts according to straightness as much as possible until they are aligned.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is concussion of the teeth with disruption, now strengthen those that you expect will break with gold or silver or thread; and immediately apply cerate on the fractured jaw, and then apply a double cloth, and place a properly made bandage or a piece of sole leather equal to the length of the jaw; and then bind it above as is appropriate for your binding method and convenient application, so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and give him food that is easy to swallow.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you think that the shape has already been altered in any way, then at that time you should cut it and loosen that on the third day; and immediately correct what has already been altered by it and plaster that with powder of myrtle, egg white, or flour of cumin, once you have laid the cerate on it, and place over the plaster lion's wool.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then as you apply and adjust that plaster over it, and the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it, do not loosen it until it is healed and the fracture is strengthened; for usually this fracture is cured in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if on another occasion an abscess occurs, then administer what we have mentioned often for its relief until it is healed, and let that abscess be drained.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is with a splinter, then consider whether it is a piece of bone separated or embedded; then you should carefully extract those splinters with what is appropriate for that in the removal of such instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the splinter is narrow, then enlarge it with a scalpel according to the amount needed.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then when you have placed those splinters, and none of them will be drained, close the opening of the splinter if it is wide; and if not, place over it one of the plasters that are appropriate for this purpose until it heals.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Most often, the clavicle is broken in front of the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Or it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts without affecting the function; and it is easy to restore it. Or it happens that the fracture affects the function, and its restoration is difficult; or it is such that the fracture involves a condition.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture involves a condition, is such that you make two assistants present, so that one holds the patient's arm and supports the broken clavicle, and the other extends the neck towards that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then adjust the fracture with the fingers so that its shape is made according to what is necessary, and it should not have a slight prominence or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then it is necessary to place under the armpit of the injured side a pad made of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to the quantity needed; extend and elevate the clavicle and compress the pad with your hand so that you can adjust the fracture as required.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the end of the clavicle to the outer parts, so that it reaches the preon, then the patient should be reclined on their neck, and place under the muscle a pad about half as large.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant presses the muscle below so that the bone of the clavicle is elevated to reach the preon, and then you correct the fracture and adjust it with your fingers.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel pain from the furcula and its joints, now is the time to cut into it and extract those irritations easily.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, now use your ingenuity to make an incision with one of the scalpels which you have prepared for this purpose, since you paused below the furcula with the instrument that serves as the ciphac; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, and its shape is as follows:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to the hollow part of a bowl, whose shape it resembles; and its width should be according to what you need, depending on the size of the bone or its scarcity.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; let there be two ends as you see fit, and one end wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound you have incised when extracting the irritation from the bone is wide, and you are sure it will form a boil or cauterization, now you should approximate the two lips of the wound with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear it will form a boil or cauterization, now you should treat the wound with plasters and powders according to the extent of the wound's incision.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess or cauterization occurs, now apply a plaster made of vinegar and rose oil mixed with vinegar, and place it over that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	But the fixation of the bone when it is in a wound and its section is that you place a plaster made of flour mixed with egg white, and apply it to the stump of the bone, and then place a sphere below the tip if needed, and then take a bandage, which is called toraka by the Saracens, about as long as your palm or around that length; and its width should be about one palm. Then place double powder over the stump and the plaster; then take a thin board of which the width is three fingers wide and in length similarly; then wrap it with cloth, and wrap that cloth around the board at the site above the fracture site; then apply ointment as it is prepared, and roll it around the neck and below the tip as needed, and reduce it to all parts, and when you see that the fixation of the fracture with reduction has taken place, and this is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And do not let the splint be loose over the broken bone; and therefore see the patient every day, so when the bandage is loosened or you see the splint already moved, then you must correct this and tighten the bandaging.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And place the patient's pillow on his neck, and below him a cushion to raise his sleep position slightly during the night; therefore, in this way, lift the support of his chest, and thus elevate the fracture of the collarbone by raising the muscles; or bind his arm to his neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the bandage unless you find an abscess in the area immediately or within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you see his face turned to it, and adjust around the constriction and restore it until it is set and the collarbone fracture is healed.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some people it is done in less time.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The bone is broken in the middle and not at the edges but along its sides.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when it is broken in that place — and it is broken in the middle of it — and it is known only by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture prepare him and reduce it according to its natural figure in every way that is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then pause over the place where you sprinkle powdered egg white and apply a lion's head bandage; and then pause with double-layered cloth powder; and then pause over the wound table, finely sprinkled according to the quantity of the spoonful, either all or at least a little.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if you leave the wound table slightly concave in some places of the spoonful, then you cover that concavity with a lion's head bandage, and then press the wound table evenly.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then apply a linen strip above with moderate tension and secure the wound table so that it does not move from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the bandaging each day; and every time it is loosened, reapply it and tighten it evenly if the wound has moved from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And place the dressing on its usual side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the wound will be healed in xx days or in .xx5. 
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bandage, and you know for certain that it concerns the bones of which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the place of the bone piece and place the chain below it, then you cut above it, remove it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the clavicle, should suppuration or cauterization occur here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of foot fractures.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot sometimes is broken in the middle and remains thus; but the extremities move as cicatrization and comminution occur.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the accidents when the middle of it is broken, it inclines towards the internal parts and there occurs great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, weakness, vomiting blood; and a cavity is formed in the broken bone and it is not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies supine on their back, and a cushion is placed between their shoulders; then gently press the muscles, and adjust the ribs by two or more ribs, and delicately perform the operation and the reduction in every possible manner suitable for this, until the figure of the bone returns as required.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place over it plaster and cotton, and place beneath thin splints of wood or reeds or similar light materials, after which you wrap that in cloth; and then gently bind that above the broken bone without pressing too hard; and go around the binding several times along the back, and tighten that with moderate firmness; and then examine the bandage at all times, and when it has softened, strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity compels the removal of that which has been corroded or protruded or caused pain or an abscess in the area, then you should cut it out and remove the plaster and correct what has occurred by this method of treatment; and immediately replace the plaster, if you apply it to that part; and adjust the bandaging until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in thick parts where they join; and at their extremities, near the front part, compression does not affect them because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the sense during the examination of the aforementioned ribs.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that it equalizes the fracture of the aforementioned ribs according to the possible method, until it is set as necessary, and then apply plaster and bind the broken bone with a splint if needed.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs inclines towards the inner parts, then severe pain and piercing occur, as with the pain that happens when one weeps, and because the bone pushes against the membrane; and difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of blood result; and this is difficult to treat.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the Ancients were skilled in treating that with powerful remedies.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And what they say is: it is necessary to pause from foods that cause inflammation and gas, so that the abdomen becomes swollen and extended, and the fracture is pushed outward.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	Let us proceed with what will not be a cause of easy generation of an inflamed abscess if it does not occur; and if it has already occurred, now help is given for that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them say that it should be placed above the wound and close to where the strength is drawn; and this is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the wound will draw the superfluities to the place due to its weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them say: cover the place with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and place poultices between the ribs until it is full, making the bandage fit according to the roundness; and treat the ailment near where the lung disease from food and medicine is cured.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the cause of the ailment is forcefully constraining it so that it cannot be tolerated, and if the bone is pushed against the membrane with a puncture point, we fear for the ailment; now it should be that we cut above the location, expose the broken rib, and then place over it an instrument that secures the healing process, the memory of which precedes, and that they cut the bone with ease, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then we adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitching, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs internally, now you should treat it and apply poultices in rose oil to the area, and treat the ailment with what is appropriate for an internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him lie supine on the side on which he sleeps until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the vertebrae and the collarbone.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	In some cases, there is a fracture in the bones of the collar, and treatment for them is similarly applicable to the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when it happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, at this time consider, for if you see their limbs already softened, stunned, and dead, unable to move them or extend them, and when you press on those areas with your fingers or pierce them with a needle and there is no pain felt in those areas, then you know that recovery is not possible, and in such conditions it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you move those areas and feel constriction in the said places when pierced with a needle, then you know that the vertebra is safe and that the patient will recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the neck showing similar symptoms and want to know if they will recover or not, then at this time consider the patient's condition.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If you see that the limbs are already softened and observe similar symptoms as those affecting the arms, and when lying on their back, they experience vomiting and involuntary diarrhea, and sometimes they lie on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you know it is fatal, and at this point, there is no need to work on treating them.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of those symptoms occur, then the cause is better and farther from being fatal.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for them is to apply poultices to reduce the abscess until you place warm olive oil or boiled horse chestnuts on the affected vertebra; apply this repeatedly over several days until the abscess is reduced.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	During the hours of pause, apply one of the soothing and restorative plasters, and bind it over that limb; and command the patient to use repose and tranquility and not to sleep on the side where there is pain until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that the callus of the bone has detached or for some cause it is separated from it, then proceed to scrape it over the wound and extract that piece of bone; and immediately bring together the two lips of the wound, with sutures if it is large; and afterwards treat it with one of the preparations that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the end of the bone is fractured and it is the tip of the finger, then proceed to insert your thumb of the left hand into the cavity, and align the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible by second-degree reduction; and afterwards apply a plaster and splint, if you require those, and bind it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel detached fragments in it, then proceed to handle that area, remove those fragments, and treat the wound with the treatment that is prescribed until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the Restoration of the Wound.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the arm are often fractured, and when they are broken, then their fracture is not simply a communication at the ends but are split along their length and deviate to the sides; and it happens to the patient that there is pain in the location and puncture, and movement is restricted when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand in such a way as to bring it into alignment with the figure of the fracture until it is set.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is at the extremity of the limb, then adjust it as suits you by alignment so that it resembles its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	And if the fracture is in the long bone that declines toward the lower parts, then have the patient lie on their belly so that you can prepare the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have aligned it, apply a plaster over it, and then place a splint of wood or cane next to it, and bind it tightly with bandages in such a way that you do not fear any piercing of the fracture or displacement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And align the concavity so that it fills appropriately, ensuring that it takes the alignment evenly, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	And if an acute abscess occurs, then stop the extension of the limb and its restoration until the abscess is brought under control, and apply what is necessary to treat it as previously described; then return to the restoration of the limb, and bind it as appropriate.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if the bones are displaced or fragmented, then you must treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the auxiliary bone.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The auxiliary is what is between the shoulder blade and the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is fractured, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which involves taking a flat piece of wood of moderate thickness in this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	Let there be two ends of bandages, and let it be suspended from a high place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Let the patient lie on a bench; then place the broken arm outside onto the stick until it reaches the midpoint where the curvature of the stick is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	Then suspend something heavy from that, so that the patient extends it to the lower parts; and then the physician should place the fracture along with its parts above, until the fracture returns as needed.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And another method is that the patient lies on their back with their neck, and suspend the patient's hand from the neck with bandages; then command two assistants, one to hold what is above the fracture along with its parts, and the other to hold below; and each of them should pull in their respective directions.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then wrap bandages over the fracture on one side and over it on another side, and each of the two assistants should pull in their respective directions.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then it is necessary to place half of the bandage over the knot and the other part below the fracture towards the joint.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is close to the joint, then it is necessary to place the bandage over that location and around that joint.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	And do the same with ease and skill, and when it is adjusted as needed and properly applied, then wrap it tightly without causing an abscess or injury.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If an abscess occurs and is cauterized, within seven days there will be no stricture, so pause on the linen soaked in vinegar for six times and rose oil so that the abscess can rest, then proceed with strength.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method of strengthening that is to apply a plaster over the fracture, then wrap it with a wet cloth over the plaster; then adjust the arm on that support, and place its hand upon its own muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and wrap it tightly around the support for the arm so that the arm remains in a fixed position, unless some cause of the broken bone prohibits this.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And now use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you place on the fracture the splint that is widest and strongest of the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break plus an addition of three fingers on all sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then wrap around the splints with the bandage as I have described at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your bandaging over the site of the fracture be tighter there.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is more elongated, the bandaging should be lighter.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And thus, when you arrange the splints and bandaging as we have said during the time you restore the limb to its proper position, then proceed with it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess may occur, then leave the bandaging and splints in place for seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the bandaging on all sides for three days so that it does not happen in the place properly or inflammation; or it is prohibited food from reaching the member by disposition of excess or constriction; and thus correct everything as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are confident that no cause of this will happen, then do not loosen the bandage until after three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient lie on their back, and place pillows under their head so that it is raised above the stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place a pad filled with wool evenly over it, and at all times of the night or day ensure that the figure of the broken limb is not loose or dissolved, or that the bandaging is too slack; thus correct this all according to your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And provide food for the patient according to the order we mentioned before, such that the food is light at first until healing begins; and then gradually increase the quantity of food.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	For it is customary for the bandage and dressing to be tight for forty days; and then they should be loosened, a bath should be given, and treatment should be administered with ointments that correct this.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is still rough and irritated, then do not loosen the bandaging and leave the splints on for one day or even up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of a fracture of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and radius; one of which is small and is the bone that lies under the little finger, and the other is larger and is placed below the smaller one, towards the thumb side.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	If only the larger focus or the smaller one is broken, and if they are broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller focus above is broken, its restoration is easy, and its healing is quicker.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the focus below is broken, the fracture is severe, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse still is when two bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller focus above, it is appropriate for the physician, after its restoration, to allow a short period of rest and ease until it is healed.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the larger focus is what is broken, then a more extended period of rest is necessary.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both focuses are broken together, then it is necessary to allow the most rigorous period of rest.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And it is necessary to place the hand in a cast after its restoration and extension laid flat on a pillow, with the wrist above all the fingers, so that the thumb is lower than the other fingers, and the patient lies on a sloping bed.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And there should be a pillow in front of it at the height or level of it, so that the patient does not have to work to reach it.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And one attendant should extend the arm from below toward the hand or with a cloth, and another attendant should extend it from above similarly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And the physician should set the bone so that it heals in the best position possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the setting of the bone you stagger, then at that moment reduce all parts to their place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if it appears in the injury that the bone is disjointed and it is not within your hope for its restoration, then at that moment act upon it and set it as we have described above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is with an injury, I have already treated this in a separate chapter, so follow the treatment described there.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with cerot made from olive oil and white wax, which is midway between thickness and subtlety, and place a bandage over it with gentle pressure so that the abscess yields; and then remove the cerot and apply a plaster prepared from powder mixed with egg whites; and afterward place strips; let the strip that is placed over that fracture be further away and tighter.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of strips for the arm depends on the major disposition, or rather, whether the fracture is in one bone or in two bones together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your bandage over the location of the fracture more firmly and vigorously, and when it is necessary to have less tension above the fracture or below it, apply the bandage a bit looser as was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the bandage with which it is wrapped should be of a medium thickness between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and the bandaging for some days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises for which adjustment is necessary, just as promptly the injury to the limb occurs, you should immerse the limb in hot water until that pain subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And do not constrain the limb until it rests, and then return to the bandaging.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the bandaging has already been loosened and the bone is already set and appears to be in a similar condition, then adjust everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive bandaging, for then you should loosen it slightly and leave it for some days until nourishment reaches it, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if the patient does not suffer from any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to loosen them for about twenty days or thereabouts.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then the patient's arm should be suspended by their skill in making agitated movements, and let them sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-two days, or sometimes it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the condition of the tissues and the skill of the practitioner.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of a fracture of the wrist and the bones involved.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that a fracture occurs at the wrist and the bones involved, and if it happens to them, they usually require multiple treatments.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	When it happens that the bone is fractured or dislocated, at that moment it is necessary for the patient to lie flat and facing upwards according to equality, and place the arm on top of it extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the minister should extend the broken bones and the physician should adjust them until they are properly set.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And now it is necessary to apply a plaster and lint, unless an abscess occurs which requires cauterization; and then place a bandage over it according to the size of the area, and you should have wrapped that in cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the fracture is in the parts inside the palm of the hand, and at that moment make it appear like a sphere of cloth, and command the patient to hold it with their fractured palm; then secure it with cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the bandage be applied with cloth in such a way that it is raised, so that the palm can apply to the hand; and secure it as needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	But if the fracture is in the parts outside, then it is necessary to place one bandage above and another below on the palm, so that the hand is covered and straight; and then secure it, as when the hand is rotated at the wrist with the fingers wrapped.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if there is a fracture in one of the bones of the fingers, then if it is a thumb, adjust it as needed and then secure it to the palm; if you wish, place a small straight splint so that the fracture is elevated and not worsened.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	But if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as in the middle finger, index finger, ring finger, or little finger, then it should be adjusted and wrapped to that specific finger; or all should be wrapped continuously, which is better; or place a small splint over it, as we have said for the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and approach that, the disposition of abscesses cut and opposed — both the warm operation — both with what is needed when some cause of those occurs, as it is repeated the narration of them.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of a fracture of the collarbone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The collarbone, in many cases, is broken and is felt according to how it has shifted forward and upward.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done in such a way that one bandage is stretched over the fracture and another bandage below the fracture, and the patient lies face down on their belly.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And the practitioner should extend all the bandages to their proper position according to the quality when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is closer to the shoulder joint, then the bandage should be extended toward the armpit at that point, so that the extension stops there, and the other bandage below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the fracture is closer to the armpit, then the bandage should be extended toward the armpit, and the extension should be towards the points below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And the physician should align the bone on both sides so that it is reduced according to its natural appearance and the bone is joined by proper conjunction; then it is necessary to apply plaster and bandaging, if an abscess does not occur in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if an abscess does occur, then you should leave it for several days until the abscess has subsided, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandaging of the splint should be done as follows: wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, and fold it two or three times, and trim off any excess; then wrap the joint so that it reaches to just above the wrist and down to the base of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert the bandage between the limb and the splint near the bottom of the joint, so that the ends of the bandage extend beyond both sides, and then roll over the splint and the limb any excess from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place over the limb at the location of the fracture splints, and lay one strip on top of the bone of the splint.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the spaces between the splint and the limb with soft cloths, so that the bandaging is snug.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin the firm bandaging starting from the middle at the location of the fracture with three or four wraps, and as you move away from the site of the fracture with the bandage, your wrapping should become looser, lighter, and softer.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend both ends of the bandage downward to the ankle joint, and secure both ends of the strips from the other side so that the bandaging is not loose from its position.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then leave the bandaging in place as it is, so that no corrosion, abscess, swelling, or similar conditions occur to the limb; and if any such cause does arise, then cut it away from the binding immediately, and correct what has occurred right away, as we have said previously.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If there is in the bone a splinter of bone which must be removed, then you should cut around it as much as possible; and if not, place something over it and massage that area, and treat with whatever remedy preceded the memory until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And in some cases, this fracture of the skull is strengthened by these pieces being fixed to it with bandages, as we have said about the assistant and the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of the limb that has been treated in this manner, a bad limp does not occur; but if it is restored alone, or without the other side being similarly applied, then it is necessary for the person to have a limp permanently.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the skull is strengthened in forty days or a few more days, and all of this depends on the diversity of constitutions and other circumstances.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the fracture of the kneecap often occurs in this manner, but it also happens frequently due to trauma.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	However, if it is a fracture, then it is merely a crack or bruise in its parts, and this is due to injury or several injuries, and all of this is based on the sensation experienced.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is such that what is broken in its parts should be cut away, and then reunited with the said parts until they are joined together as much as possible by equalization, facilitation, and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Apply the plaster and place it on that round bandage if you need it; and apply something above it tightly as is appropriate.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the positions that we have recommended for other fractures, as well as abscesses and similar conditions, so that whatever opposes any incident is appropriate to it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of a jaw fracture.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the jaw there are two bones, one of which is thick and is called the jawbone; the other is slender and is called the finlike bone.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And some types of fractures that occur in the jaw are similar to those that happen in the two bones of the arm, and thus its restoration is done as with the arm, and the operation for it is the same.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if two bones are broken and come together incorrectly, the jaw is distorted in all directions.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the finer bone is broken, the jaw is displaced forward.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the thicker bone is broken, it will be below, and such cases are beyond your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, alignment, and fixation of the fragments accordingly.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, be careful if the jaw fracture is jagged with sharp points, as the extension should be gentle and done with great caution.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And when there is any cause for an operation on the arm, and you have straightened out the bones and completed all the necessary work, at that time take pieces of wood from pine trees which are prepared from materials stored in the ground, and make them similarly from palm branches; select those with slight grooves, not too wide, and let their length be according to the length of the arm, and place one end into the skin below.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap around each piece of cloth in two coverings according to its length, and place one at the beginning of the arm on one side and the other on the opposite side, with one end inserted into the skin near the wrist.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then bind the two bones in three places at both ends and in the middle, because with this structure the arm is prevented from tilting to either side and thus remains in proper position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And now apply a wooden brace according to the length of the arm; and place it in such a way that the arm can maintain its necessary movements.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And especially do this in the case of a fracture, and when it is properly a bruise as well.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the arm each day and study it carefully as per previous studies, and you should guard it from abscesses, inflammation, or other similar causes; and when any such cause occurs, at that time take action on it so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the heel and of the bones of the foot and of the ones mentioned.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	To the scalp does not happen total fracture; but to the bones of the foot sometimes happens partial fracture; and to the said bones of the foot rarely happens fracture, and to them only happens healing in months of disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if to the bones of the foot happens fracture and times those bones be raised above themselves between them, then the patient places his foot on the ground prepared thus as mentioned.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then places one foot on what is raised of those bones, and then steps on them, and presses, and binds them until they return to their proper places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then applies a plaster and stops above it, and below the arch of the foot places a small board with two flat ends.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthens that with the foot in a proper position, since you have wrapped it with cloths and other materials as needed.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And as three or four days pass, then you loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones aligned, or broken or dislocated, and the procedure with them is as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if any of them are broken, then restore those, and align them as I have recommended to you in the restoration of the bones of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the finger, and make it slightly longer; and below the foot place the board as recommended to you, and strengthen that with proper positioning.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if what is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then you place on each finger a splint of its quantity wrapped in soft cloth, and strengthen the board at the bottom of the foot, and make it stand on one end of the board below the arch of the foot so that it remains well secured.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	It is fitting for you not to forget that you should not disregard all the causes which are mentioned to you in the other fractures of the accidents we have spoken about; and prepare yourself for every circumstance with this one as well.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the fracture of the coccyx in women and of the bone of the penis and of the shaft of the penis in men.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the coccyx of a woman is fractured, at that moment make that incision in a reclined position, and shortly after incline her to one side slightly, and let her be held from behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And shortly after, the midwife fills the coccyx with cotton, and it should be done in the cavity as if it were intact; and then the woman should be bandaged, and her back should be raised little by little, for all of this is to ensure that before long she will be in front with the fractured part of the coccyx as if it were intact and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place poultices on her back, and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton to facilitate it, and after she has urinated, reduce and return that part according to the method by which you managed it at the beginning, and then return it to its original poultice.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around that time, for it is then restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and stitch to its mouth a tube of cane; and insert the entire bladder into the cavity, and then blow through the tube until the bladder is inflated inside the cavity, for this will cause the fracture to return.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	Let it be filled with cotton and placed for some days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the thumb of a man or woman is broken, administer at its restoration and alignment what we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures that rarely occur, especially for one who studies and uses this my book; for such a fracture signifies to you in the major positions through straightness in its restoration and alignment, and thus you understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the penis when it is broken, take a splint of wood, and place the penis on it; then bind it with cloth wrapping, and let it be bandaged, and afterwards left for three days or about that time, until it heals.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of bone fractures when there is inflammation.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for one who suffers a fracture with inflammation, and especially if the bone is large like the femur or the humerus, or similar to these, that you treat them and perform bloodletting as soon as the conditions for bloodletting indicate it to you, as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the inflammation causes bleeding, then it is appropriate for you to treat it by restraining it in such a way that you powder on it finely sieved turmeric, unless another cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If an abscess is cauterized, do not resume the restoration of the inner part until the ninth day, after which the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third and fourth days either, for you may cause adverse effects.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the broken bone protrudes above the skin, then you must act to reduce and align it with ease and in a short distance.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension is not within your reach and the alignment cannot be done with your hands alone, then reduce it using this tool; this tool is made of iron, its length being seven or eight digits, and its width according to the size of the wound. Therefore, it is necessary for the surgeon to have three or four such tools in various sizes suitable for treating all kinds of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And let it be round, and let it be in slight curvature so that it does not bend during compression upon it at the time of the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And let it have sharp ends with margins at its extremities; and let the upper part be thick, while the middle part be narrower.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called in Greek "λάβρα βουληντζ ἀτελέρμ", which means a slightly curved palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the extremity of it can be placed steadily with the affected part elevated above the protruding bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And apply it in one motion until the bone returns to its place, and is aligned with some degree of accuracy.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Therefore, try to align the ends of the broken bone between them, and if the end of the broken part is delicate and does not accept that tool as a good option, then you must insert the end of that bone into where the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone entirely as we have recommended, then insert that part with one of the chisels which we mentioned; or saw that part with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And smooth that which remains rough on the bone and small scratches.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction the patient still feels intense pain, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and at that point do what will greatly help the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the bone is complete, then soak a cloth in black styptic wine, and especially if it is summer; do not place cerot or any other substance with oil on the wound, so that it does not cause decay and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer poultices at the appropriate time for the completion of the bone restoration, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can insert a probe with forceps and use dressings according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be careful at all times not to touch the wound with your hands during the fracture treatment, for many times inexperienced doctors have done this, causing death or chronic illness or severe harm to their patients.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the swelling is soft, loose, different from the swelling of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the swelling is large or is a bad swelling, and you fear some of the maladies which we have recounted, and you feel pain in that place, then at this hour it does not suit to pause on those splints, but make an enveloping bandage of hard cloths instead of splints and lay them there.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when after one day or two days the swelling begins to subside, indicating that the heat has been generated in it, then you remove the cloth which you had placed over it, and soon apply poultices, among which are those according to our custom used for treating swellings, such as tetrafarmacon and similar remedies.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is convenient for you to loosen the bandage and examine the swelling each morning and evening until it is consolidated and firm, and it should be such that the suppuration can run from it to the lower parts with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If several days have passed and the swelling has not consolidated nor has the heat subsided from it, then you should know that here you are struggling with small issues for which you need to examine the swelling with a probe.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those issues that are separate and removable, remove and extract them; but for those that cannot be separated and cause pain when the limb is moved, proceed to incise them as much as possible according to what is feasible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the swelling becomes inflamed or infected, which is a sign of pus formation or some other form of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary to proceed with one of those treatments that are appropriate for the cure, as described in the preceding narrative of the relevant chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And when the bone is cut, it protrudes above the limb like the bones of the chest and shoulder and similar to those of large limbs, and do not assume traction on it, nor its extraction for four movements (or times), as death often occurs because of this; and then allow that one inside which can heal, for it will easily fall out in about twenty or thirty days; and meanwhile treat the wound if it is visible, and if not, leave it alone.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of stiffness that occurs as a consequence of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	This stiffness often occurs as a consequence of the healing of a fracture, especially near the joints, and it disfigures the shape of the limb; and quite easily prevents the limb from performing its natural function.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider whether the stiffness is recent and administer medicines that have a binding effect, such as aloes, henna, myrrh, saffron, colocynth, and similar ones; take some or all of these, and combine them with either vinegar or egg white or plain water, and apply this mixture over the stiffness using a bandage and bind it tightly.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave the binding in place without loosening it for several days; then loosen it and apply another one until the stiffness is alleviated; or place a sheet of lead gently on it, as lead has the property of reducing anything that is swollen in limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the stiffness has already turned to bone and is tight, and the necessity requires that it be removed immediately, then cut it at its weakest point, and excise the excess or reduce it with some instruments until it is alleviated; and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of fractures when they are restored and adjusted according to the natural position of the limb, gently and carefully.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a fracture is restored and the limb is gently and carefully adjusted, it happens for several reasons: one of which is too much loosening or improper bandaging of the limb; or due to excessive tightness in the bandages preventing nourishment from reaching the limb; or due to an excess of poultices; or due to unnecessary movement at the wrong time; or due to a lack of blood in the patient's body and weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The treatment for this is to feed the patient and make their body soft so that blood is multiplied in them; administer baths; and apply poultices and lettuce on them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And placing plasters on the limb is appropriate, as the plaster draws nourishment to it, or continuing the application of warm water poultices, so that nourishment flows and returns to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of broken bones when they are restored incorrectly and prevent the necessary operation from being performed on them.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens that a limb, already restored near its healing, shows deformity, swelling, and knots in the broken bone, and thus appears to be recently fractured due to this condition, although the limb is not prevented from performing its natural function, you should not accept the opinion of those who believe the limb has been newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Let us know these states and conditions which the doctors and restorers have performed here; and this operation is highly reprehensible leading to great fear, the sign of which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If lameness and limping are recent, it is now appropriate to apply embrocations with tepid water in which soft herbs are soaked, such as althea roots and linseed, and melilot; and let a poultice of softening be made properly with dough or olive oil, and it should be applied with that; or let mucilage from linseed root be taken and mixed with egg whites or olive oil, and apply with that; or take fat figs and grind them with dove's milk, and similarly for the medicines called consolidatives.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And in some cases it is dissolved through frequent light friction, which should be applied to the most humid areas, and movement of the limb should be administered to all parts at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if the tortuosity has already advanced and is firmly set and has become hardened into bone and necessitates treatment with iron, now it should be that the pus above is evacuated and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and it should be cut away those superfluous parts of the knotting of that tissue with the bone with subtle cutting instruments, and ease in that should be administered through diligence and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On Dislocation
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the wrongful displacement of one of the joints from its place, by which it is prohibited from movement, and the figure of the limb is distorted, causing severe pain and great injury.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when an accident of a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to reduce it immediately so that it is set, and do not delay in reducing it, for if it is delayed, the area becomes inflamed and it then becomes difficult to perform the reduction of the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, it is not appropriate to move or stand during the time of inflammation, as doing so often causes spasms and pain in the teeth.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when this happens, it is necessary for you to proceed with the incision of the abscess, and then allow it to rest until the inflammation subsides; afterwards, the limb should be bathed in hot water and oil, and then reduction can be performed with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And the entire limb should be treated with whatever remedy will come to mind for its care.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And thus I have organized the chapters on dislocation as they were preceded in fractures; starting from the upper part of the body to the lower part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	When both jaws are dislocated, they do not delay in being treated; and the dislocation of both can be done in one of two ways: either they are partially removed from their places by slight movement and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated and fully separated, to the point where they are soft at the joint where saliva flows from the mouth and where it cannot be closed, and the tongue is wrapped in its place.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But when the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its normal position by itself with minimal intervention.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and perfect, it must be reduced immediately, and not delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the minister should take the lead in error, and insert the physician's two fingers of one hand into the mouth of the patient if the dislocation is on one side; or that he insert both hands' fingers together if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other said movements be done equally with them; and command the patient to cease their jaw movement and allow those to move from each part; and the physician should equalize the jaw and push it in until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer inhalation with hot water and oil until the reduction can be performed gently on both, and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And so when we return them and they are equalized, and the patient's mouth is closed and not relaxed, then apply pressure on those small pieces of cloth covered with wax, and let it be made of beeswax and oil softened; and afterwards it should be applied gently with ease using straps.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be placed between both ears, so that it does not turn to either the right or left side; and do not force them to chew for any reason; have their food cut with scissors until when the pains are alleviated and the jaws are healed, then allow them to eat as they wish.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered gently, and do not work on the opening of the mouth for eating and drinking and speaking until the jaw is healed and cured.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two dislocated jaws is difficult at any time and they are not returned to their places, fevers frequently occur and continuous sweats, and the belly of the patient is easily distended, and vomiting pure bile occurs easily.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then you know it is lost; and frequently such a one dies within seven days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The clavicle is not dislocated from the chest within; and sometimes it is dislocated outwardly, and this is apparent by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then press the area with your palm firmly, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then apply a plaster and powders and strengthen that area.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the extremity of that which connects to the neck and is continuous with it is not dislocated on any day; therefore, it must be reduced and bandaged as we have said and as you have prepared.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a plaster, powders, and bandages, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the upper part to the lower part.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	The second is when it is dislocated above the muscle, and this happens slowly; and it is not dislocated to the rear by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated to the front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	It is most often dislocated outward below the tendon, and more frequently in those whose flesh is thin, it dislocates easily; but in those with thick muscles, it remains dislocated with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And it often happens to some people due to a blow or fall that the muscle becomes swollen and inflamed, and as a result, it is likely to become dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then it is necessary for you to understand this while you are in charge of the case, and from there proceed with its treatment.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation is known when it is below the tendon; thus, you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal one, as there is a clear difference between them; you find a depression at the head of the muscle below the tendon upon touching, and the injured person cannot move their arm to their ear, nor perform such movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated below the tendon or above it, you will then find a clear and obvious touch, and it is not concealed.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	Of this dislocation there is made a light reduction when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the practitioner raises the hand to the upper parts; and then places gentle pressures below the joint, lifting the articulation firmly into its proper place, and the practitioner raises the hand, and extends it there; and then lets it go when it returns lightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return as we have said, and the pain of the initial dislocation persists for several days, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water and a poultice be administered to soften and relax it as if for rheumatism, using rue, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and let this be applied.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient is positioned on their back and placed below the joint while waiting for wool to be softened between levity and strictness, and then the physician places his thumb over the sphere, lifting the muscle upward with force, and pulls the patient's hand so that it is not injured below, and another assistant holds the patient’s head, so that it is not hurt below, because it will immediately return to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: which is that you make a person present who is taller than the patient, and stand on the side of the affected limb, and insert their muscle below the joint of the patient and lift the joint upwards to suspend the patient in the air, and another assistant pulls the hand of the patient from below their abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is light, it is necessary that another person support them, so as not to strain that side, because the dislocation will return immediately.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in this way according to another method: and that is planted in the ground a long pole whose head is round like a mortar pestle, neither thick nor thin, and then it is placed near the patient; once you place over the top of the pole lion skins, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and then his hand is stretched out towards the sides behind the other side; and his body is extended from the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction of it is difficult due to all the causes that we have mentioned, then use this treatment: and that is you take a pole whose length is two braccia, and its width is four digits, and its thickness is tapered at the tip according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then over the round head place lion skins so that the pole does not hurt the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then it is placed near the patient's tip, and his hand or arm is stretched over the pole towards the sides, and the pole is wrapped around the assistant and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then place the arm on a ladder step according to its width, and the hand is stretched towards the sides, and the other body is suspended from the other side, for the joint will return quickly.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument is completed according to each method that is possible for you, then place under the tip a pad of wool of equal quantity; and then apply a plaster prepared from powdered myrtle leaves and egg white over the entire muscle, as it has been described above, and then bandage tightly around the tip with proper tension; and wrap the bandage around the plaster, and attach the patient's hand to their neck, and leave it like this, and do not disturb the patient's hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	When the food of the sick person has been restricted for a short time, so that the member is strengthened, it is easier to achieve healing.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And when the food is given more frequently, every seven or five hours, and movement is exercised; and thus if it is firm and not softened, then healing has already occurred.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to frequent exposure to moisture that occurs or for another reason, then it should be treated with cautery three times, as was said before in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not stable, and the plaster and compression are reduced several times, yet it is not firm and the hand cannot be raised to the sides, then you will know that the nerves of it, which control the muscle, have been severed or extended or softened, and you will understand that the joint will never again be fixed in its proper place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Regarding the dislocation that occurs from the feet and the heel or the parts behind, the reduction is done with impulse and extension as much as necessary until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And the other compression should be administered to it, and care for it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if heaviness in the limb and slowness in its movement occur as healing progresses, then the patient should use baths several times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the collarbone.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the collarbone is dislocated with difficulty and seemingly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, but mostly forward or backward. And the dislocation of it is not hidden from you when it is seen below the view or below the touch according to some figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated one, that is clearly declared to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor touch its muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And you should treat it, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it becomes an abscess due to heat, for if it reaches that stage, its reduction is difficult, and it is not easily healed completely; especially when it affects the rear parts, for it is worse than all other types of dislocations, more painful, and many people die because of it.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand be extended by two fingers, and the arm be expanded, and the physician's hand should be on the collarbone below it, and he should press the joint with his fingertips or with the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is forward, then it should be returned by bending the hand with the palm, until it strikes the collarbone with the palm of his hand.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer vigorous extension and strong motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two assistants should extend the arm, and hold it firmly by both sides so that it is not moved during the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And so the arm should be turned round on every side, because it is wrapped in a long doubled cloth or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the surgeon touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that this may be for those causes which help in the lubricity of the joint and ease of movement; and then press the joint forcefully inward until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And so for the reduction of the dislocated shoulder, place it on a splint which has stiffness and stability with an egg bandage, and bind it tightly in a descending manner, and hang the arm from the neck, and leave it like this for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it should be loosened; and if the joint is formed in its proper place, now you may untie the bandage of it and leave it like that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint not properly firm, then you should reapply the plaster and bandage, and leave it like that for several days until it is bound up; and then loosen it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if it happens that there is swelling around the reduction of the joint and its disposition is in motion, then administer hydration through bathing and gentle friction, and compression, until it is calmed; or place cold applications on the joint, as this is a condition of inflammatory movement; and then bind it up, and leave it like that day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then lift that, and place it in bath water; when dry, you should rub the joint with moderate friction, and then reapply cold applications, as this is a sign of inflammatory movement, once, and the second time, and the third time, respectively.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	take an instrument for bathing, enter where it is clean.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, place a poultice over that moist and inflamed wound at the border and apply it; do this for several applications, since that area is moist and reduce it to its proper condition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the wrist, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The dislocation of the hand sometimes occurs, and the reduction of this dislocation is easier compared to other joints. However, it is important that there be speed in reducing it at the hour when it happens, before swelling sets in or an abscess forms.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of the dislocation is done by placing the joint of the patient's hand on a table and having an assistant extend the patient’s hand. The surgeon then places his hand or palm over the vicinity of the joint and gently presses it until it returns to its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it must be considered whether the palm is already displaced towards the back of the hand. If so, the patient should place the backs of their hands on a table during extension and reduction; if the dislocation is towards the front of the hand, then the position of the hand should be such that it lies flat on the table, so that the surgeon's hand can apply to that vicinity of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns quickly, that is good; but if not, then apply a bandage to reduce the swelling and leave it like that; do not repeat this, for otherwise, you will neither endure nor be able to perform the reduction after a few days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, if the joint remains stiff according to its tortuosity; and you do not notice any other cause for pain, except that the muscle is softened and cannot grasp any cause; then you know that the nerves are cut or severed, and at this time no remedy can be applied there unless it be hardened by cauterization, which also helps remove some causes.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Then when the pain has subsided, you should pause on the bandage which we have recommended, and let it remain and harden for five days; then afterwards it should be loosened and left, and the hand should be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	However, if the movement of it remains restricted and you encounter any gravity in it, then treat it gently with warm water and friction several times until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the said joint.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes the said joints are dislocated completely.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any of them is dislocated towards the thumb or towards the palm, then straighten the finger and apply pressure to its dislocation with your fingers until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then hold the tip of the finger and suspend it above the part to which it is dislocated, and let it be so for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened on that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, bandage it according to the aforementioned instructions, and do not stop loosening it during the day and exercising with movement, and bandage it at night; and do this for several days until it is strong.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	If it appears thus, if it is dislocated from the palm of the hand, and join that to that part and do with this the first operation, until it be healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do with this when it is dislocated to the other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When it happens to any of the vertebrae of the back or neck that they are completely dislocated and the bones move out of their places, then there is no treatment for this, for death is feared for the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the movement of the patient occurs without their will, and they cannot retain it; and often some parts of them or one side of them or two arms or one of these become weakened; or a vertebra is out of its place, as sometimes it moves and sometimes it returns to four places.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then when it is moved to the rear parts, it is called kyphosis.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But the treatment for this is that you must consider whether the kyphosis occurred due to weakness, because then there is no cure and it cannot be fully healed.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in the case where it occurs due to falling or impact or something similar to these, the Ancients have described methods of treatment at length, from which I will summarize what is essential; but I will abbreviate that part for which a little explanation suffices because of my proximity to understanding and exposition, with which I have made this clear and structured using various instruments different from those used to demonstrate and explain it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And say that in gynecology which happens from the division ahead in the legs, there is neither origin nor cure for that; and similarly for that which is done on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, it is not cured except for that which happens in the two properly as I mention.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient lie extended on his face on a bed equal to the wall, and be stretched below the operating table so that the legs not touch the ground.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And near a straight pole should be placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the bed by its head, and another pole around the feet at the other end of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister holds the pole, and it should not be fixed in a pit; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And near wrap around the head of the patient and below the shoulders tie a strong bandage; and extend the end of the bandage to the pole which is behind the head, and tie that to it; and then stretch the other bandage over the hips of the patient with the knees bent; and then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other pole which is behind the feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the minister should extend the bandage to the side of the pole, and do not move the two poles and the bandages from their places in which they are fixed, but rather ensure they are not too tight as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the physician should place his palms on the spine with strength until it returns to position, or place upon that a table, and then adjust the patient's feet on the table until they are in proper alignment.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If the patient does not return to this method, take a table whose width or length is about three cubits, and dig in the wall near where we said the patient lies a place into which the end of the table can fit.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And place the middle of the table over the spine, and the physician places his weight at the other end, and gently strain it until the spine is compressed and returns to its proper place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open a ring that is wrapped around the hand; and place the patient's head between the heels of two poles, the length of which should be one arm, and behind his head place the heels of two more poles in the same manner; and ensure there is a palm’s distance between each pole, and attach each pole to the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be a round pole in which is the ring, and it should be wrapped around the two ends of the two poles.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it there is an end around which the pole is formed, the length of which is one palm where it is wrapped; and on the other two poles there is something similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then strain the ropes that you tied to the patient's feet at the end behind his head, and the ropes that you tied around his shoulders at the ring behind his feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then behind each ring should be a minister who turns the ring with his hand, and the physician should straighten the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And after the spine is returned to its place and the area is leveled, it is necessary to apply a poultice of hot flour paste, and then cover it with wool; and afterwards place over the poultice a stick of wood whose width is three fingers or thereabouts, and whose length should be equal to the extent of the swelling, and on both sides of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards wrap it with the bandage we have mentioned, and use mild nourishment until he is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any stiffness remains in the area at the end of the healing process, it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and lubricate along with the prolonged use of the board we have recommended; and a sheet of lead may also be applied to that location.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And at times stiffness occurs in the posterior part of the lower spine due to displacement; and that bone is such that it can lead to death if pressure is applied to it with this treatment, so one must be cautious not to do so.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the muscle attachment are subject only to dislocation, and do not suffer what happens to other joints with small movements and concavities.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip can be dislocated in four ways: either inward, outward, forward, or backward.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is more seriously dislocated towards the interior parts, and slightly towards the anterior or posterior parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The sign of the dislocation of the thigh towards the interior parts is that when you adjust the leg of the patient on the healthy side, it is longer and the knuckle is more prominent than on the healthy side, and the patient cannot bend their affected leg without pain, which is due to where the pus from an abscess has accumulated because the head of the bone has already reached there.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of the one to whom a dislocation outward occurs is that the symptoms are opposite to those of the aforementioned condition.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of the one to whom a dislocation towards the anterior occurs is that when he attempts to straighten his leg according to its full extension, it does not bend due to pain in the joint, and if he tries to walk, he cannot do so towards the front; and his urine is retained and his swallowing is affected by an abscess, and he walks on his heel.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of the one to whom a dislocation towards the rear occurs is that he cannot extend the joint, nor can he bend it forward as much as when swallowing, and his leg is shorter than the other, and his throat is softened, and the head of the bone is in that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	However, the reduction of these types of dislocation is that you consider whether the dislocation is old and ancient, in which case it has already settled in its position, so you administer reduction according to its disposition, but then it may not be entirely cured; therefore, it should not be expected to achieve full recovery at that time.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In the case of one in which the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, place your hand so that you can turn the joint and extend it to the parts within and without, and move it to the right and left, for it easily returns to its place and does not require other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare someone strong and extend the arm from its side towards the rear, or place your hands under its armpits, or use a bandage which is laid over the upper part of the arm; and another person should extend their hand above and place their fingers below the elbow joints; and immediately apply a lion's ligature tightly around the shoulder joint, while having another person hold the end of the ligature.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And this extension of the arm or from the part inside to the angle of the shoulder blade, or from the rear part to the side.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And make the extension of all these in one motion while the patient is raised off the ground and remains hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this species of extension is common to all four types.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for all types what I will say about its proper treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the shoulder when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is towards the inside, the patient should be laid on their side; then place bandages around the shoulder joint at the location where the head of the humerus and the area below the angle meet; and then extend the bandage from the part of the angle to the farthest part of the shoulder blade.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Let another strong minister take the limbs of the patient and firmly grasp the place near the joint that is diseased and extend it forcefully to its parts outwardly through extension, for it returns to its proper place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is of the quickest cure among those to which this member is reduced compared to the others.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if you excuse yourself and do not obey the treatment for this species of cure entirely, then it is necessary to bind both sides of the patient together with a strong, quick bandage over both heels and both toes.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each one be the quantity of four fingers, and let the diseased side be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And let the patient be suspended over the top of the beam, and hold it with his hand; and let the distance from him to the ground be the length of two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong youth to pull the head of the limb, and let another youth hold the patient, while this other youth pulls the limb with great strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the proper reduction, when it is dislocated to the outward part, let the patient lie on his back as we have recommended for lying down; and let the bandage be tightly applied to the diseased side properly and over his feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then two beams should be placed, one under his feet and the other under his head; and then place beams adjusted to the middle of the body laid upon which wet cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not harmed by the beam being between his limbs, so that during extension downward it does not pull him.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	Let each attendant extend his part, and the surgeon with his art bring about the reduction.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Thus, if you obey the reversal, it will be greatly beneficial; and otherwise, pause on that carefully as we have said regarding jaundice for such treatment.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But it is necessary that the patient lie on his back calmly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is to the front parts, then it is necessary that the patient be extended quickly, and according to this method described, lie on their back; and the surgeon places the palm of his right hand on the patient's thigh, and with one hand grasps that area firmly, and while doing so, extends the leg from the rear part towards the front.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is to the rear parts, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended towards the back, but rather raised off the ground; however, it is necessary that they lie on a hard surface, just as it is necessary when the hip joint is dislocated outwardly, as we have said about positioning the body on two planks; and it should be on their side with the limbs extended, as we have said, for there to be healing.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it is necessary to apply compression to the table at the location of the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Thus, when the reduction is complete as it should be — and the sign of hip reduction is not hidden from you, which is that you extend the patient's two legs, and when you see them equal and the patient extends their leg freely without pain, then you know that the limb has returned as it should — and now you adjust two things and apply a bandage to support and immobilize with a bandage so that the hip is not harmed in any part; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then undo the bandage and the dressing, and compare one side with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Now, if you see those marks on the skin, now you know that the dislocation has been fixed, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of inflammation, now you return and dress that area, and apply it according to your initial structure, and let it be for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then undo that [dressings/bandages], and allow the patient to delay in walking on each [affected area] for several days until they are comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the knee.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The knee can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward, inward, and backward toward the heel; it cannot be dislocated forward.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of knee dislocation is that you instruct the patient to apply pressure to the side; now you know that the knee is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all forms of dislocation is to have the patient lie on their side, such that they can extend their leg as much as possible; place your hand against the affected area, and put the heel between your hands; then hold the knee with both your palms, and pull those firmly around the knee with strength, while another assistant extends the leg so that the knee returns to its proper position.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of successful reduction is that the leg adheres to the side with ease and without laborious effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Apply the plaster to it and make the cup adhere to the wound, then bind those with a bandage for three days or four, and afterward loosen those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the limb for movement for some days until it is healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of the thigh to the trunk is unnecessary, now administer extensive treatment with bandages, as previously described in the treatment of the hip.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle is sometimes displaced by slight movement, and at other times it is dislocated completely; the dislocation of it occurs either towards the interior parts or towards the exterior parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that the ankle becomes swollen towards the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the treatment for its displacement is easy reduction, and it should be extended with ease and gradually returned to normal once it begins to heal.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the treatment when it is completely dislocated, ensure that the limb is placed correctly, and let the patient have a strong and capable assistant behind him at the midpoint of the affected area.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then place your right hand on the most superior part of it, and your left hand on the part below the foot at the location of the joint.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand for two attempts, and then extend with your left; and push the toes of the foot with your right hand around the cup with effort.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	In this place let two ligatures be made as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then press the feet of the patient to the third ligature, and you will be at the nail.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore, if it returns in one ligature or in two according to this method, and if the foot becomes swollen, it is good; and otherwise, at that time repeat the operation, for it will return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if it is prohibited for you to reduce the swelling as we have recommended, then let the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a roller firmly on the ground under them, so that it fits between their buttocks, and you have wrapped them in a cloth so that they do not slide.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the attendant should hold the patient's body, and another attendant should extend the leg with their hands or with bandages around the neck of the foot; and then each attendant should stretch it as they see fit, and the roller should be placed between the patient’s thighs to keep it in place so that the patient’s body is not pulled downward beyond its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the surgeon should manipulate the dislocation with his hands, and another attendant should hold the healthy limb below, as the dislocation will return with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and you are assured of the successful reduction, now apply a plaster and tightly bind that with bandages, and secure the foot with bandages to the board.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful of the nerves that lie behind the heel, so that the bandage over them is not too tight and does not injure them severely.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Let him stay like that for two days or three; and if the bandage is softened, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Then untie that on the third day or on the fourth, and forbid the patient from moving for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if he is forced to move before that time, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and then it will not respond to treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if it happens that the abscess is cauterized, now you must administer according to the description in our narrative concerning the place for treatment and application, in another location for care and dressing, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the said foot joints.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It is necessary that the one who is dislocated rest with some extension without work; and what is not difficult is best done quickly.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in any of the joints of the two feet, now you must have the patient lie on a flat surface on the ground or on a table, and place them as if they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand on one foot, and place your foot on the joint that needs to be corrected, and then press it with your foot firmly until it returns to its proper position, and see that it is now in alignment and does not appear raised.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place the foot on a table that supports the entire foot, which has two ends, and then secure it with proper and firm bandaging for three days; and then untie it and have the patient rest from walking for ten days, until it is healed and recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Concerning the kinds of dislocations that occur from plague or fracture or any such conditions.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any cause of those conditions occurs, and you proceed with the treatment of it and the restoration of it, often death results.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And because of this, one should not presume to treat it unless they are wise in the art, with long practice, merciful and compassionate, neither hasty nor presumptuous; and use medicines at first that only ease swellings, and leave the patient to divine judgment, but turn to him whom you hope will bring salvation from destruction or relief from illness, where some hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then strive to reduce it as soon as possible at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes a dangerous swelling.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the member returns as we wish, immediately administer a regimen that reduces dangerous swelling and treat the injury with what is appropriate from among dry applications.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is with a fracture and occurs in the separated bones, then you should proceed with their management as we have said concerning simple injuries in those parts.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid, according to your virtue, the instrument in the ways of fear as my teaching has preceded; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more healthful for your true body, which will be in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Albucasis perfectly; may God be blessed for them.
Amen.	Amen.
