Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, my sons, now that I have completed this book, which is the last of the sciences of medicine, by completing its purpose at the end and through its explanations and clarifications, it seems to me that I have made clear to you the treatise which concerns what I do myself, namely surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For surgery is completely neglected in our region and in our time, to the point that the practice of it has almost disappeared and its knowledge remains scarce; we only find small descriptions of it in the books of the Ancients, which have altered much of it, leading people into error and hesitation because they do not understand its principles and thus weaken its power and art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I should revive this treatise according to the order of exposition and clarification and abbreviation; and so that it comes with the forms of cautery tools and other instruments for the work as mentioned by adding explanations and preparation, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the reason why a good practitioner is not readily found in our profession at this time is that the art of medicine is extensive, and one must be well exercised in the science of anatomy, which involves knowing the functions of the members and their forms, as well as their connections and separations; understanding the bones, nerves, and muscles, their numbers and distributions; and the pulsating and non-pulsating veins, along with their origins.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this reason Hippocrates said that in name there may be many, but few in actual practice, especially in the art of hands.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	This may we have said about that at the introduction of this book; for who is not learned in what we have said about anatomy, is not exempt from falling into error through which men are made to die, as I have seen too many of those, for some are formed in this science and throw themselves from that lack of science and lack of experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a foolish doctor who had incised an abscess in the neck of a woman and cut some arteries of the neck, so much blood flowed that the woman died shortly thereafter.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who attempted to remove a stone from a man who was ill, and the stone was large, and he came to him and pulled out that stone along with a piece of the bladder, whereupon that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I had already called out to avoid removing that stone, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I recognized that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who was receiving payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and he attended to a black castrated man who had a fracture in his thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he exposed the fracture over the wound with splints and sticks in a strong structure, but did not leave the wound breathing.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And he loosened it according to his desires, and then bandaged it, and after a few days commanded us to loosen the bandage. And thus between the time of loosening and rebandaging, the thigh and leg became abscessed, and he came to ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And he calls out to him, and he prepares to untie the ligature, and when calm is achieved he begins to alleviate his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But when corruption was confirmed in the limb, so that it could not be restrained, and the corruption did not cease to spread throughout the limb until the patient was in danger.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another surgeon who incised a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated within a few days, to the extent that it greatly revealed the skill of his lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason the malignant cancer is clear of melancholic humor is that it does not need to reach the heart entirely, but rather remains in the member which can tolerate being completely affected by it.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, children, it is necessary for you that the operation be devised in two aspects: one is an operation associated with health, and the other is a work involving great risks.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already stated this in every part of this book where there is an operation involving error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard against that and leave aside this, so that the pages do not find a way to speak falsely and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And so take up your weapons with diligence and the protection of God, and may your patients be with you in fortune and steadfastness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best path by the grace of God to lead to health and praiseworthy success, and avoid terrible diseases that are difficult to heal, and remain armed against what causes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and reputation does not evade you: for it remains more for your glory, and less in this world and later in regard to your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Wound treatment in some monastic surgeries:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat illness badly, for thus bad doctors are not named.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have dedicated this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered about the head and neck, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cautery, and of what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, about lancing and puncturing, and about cupping, and plasters, and the extraction of arrows and similar items, all chaptered and ordered regarding the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, about restoration and dislocation, and the treatment of twists and similar conditions; a chapter ordered concerning the head and neck, and the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	About cautery with fire and with sharp medicine and recall of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	There begins the treatise of the whole book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I shall speak of the quality of the movements of that cautery and of its ingredients, and in what condition cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	I say that the discourse on the quality of the movement of cautery and its ingredients is long and extensive, subtle by science, and hidden as a secret; and many wise people have spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves. It suffices for me to mention a little of their discourses, fearing lengthiness.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	Therefore, I say that cauteries conform to all complete configurations universally, whether they are made of matter or without matter, except for two configurations, which are tail-like configurations without matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the tail-like and dry configuration made of matter, one should become cautious; for some say that cautery is helpful in such cases, while others argue the opposite, stating that cautery is not appropriate for diseases caused by heat and dryness, since the nature of fire is hot and dry, and it would be inappropriate to treat a tail-like and dry disease with something hot and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And let us say that those who argue the opposite are mistaken, because cautery is beneficial in all tail-like and dry diseases that occur in human bodies. For when you compare the body of a person and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find that the human body tends to be more fragile.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say according to the words of that person, that experience has already shown this to me on several occasions.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But it does not befit one who has already been trained and exercised in the chapter of cauteries through previous practice, and who knows the diversity of human configuration and the disposition of diseases in their contexts, as well as their causes and accidents, and the time span of these matters.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other configurations, there is no need for fear on your part, especially in fragile and humid diseases, since all physicians are already in agreement about those, and they do not disagree regarding the use of cautery in such cases.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And you know, my students, that the secret of healing with fire and its effectiveness lies in the fact that fire is simple, and its action affects only the part being cauterized without harming other parts of the body nearby, causing only minor discomfort.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	Here is the translation:
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Take the fire, by its sublimity and by the goodness of its substance, it does nothing but superfluify [evaporate]. And it is known to us through experiment and through length of service in studying the art about the truth of the causes; and thereby I excuse myself from the length of speech. And if not that it were not read in my book in this pausero [pause] to you secrets hidden with the fire, and the quality of the operation of it on the bodies and of its expulsion by which you expel diseases, with philosophical demonstrative speech, which would be sharp in your possessions.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that they err who do cauteries at times which are not appropriate, and they miss the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cauteries are appropriate at all times, because the harm caused by accidental time is submerged in the benefit drawn from what the cauterization attracts, and even more so if the cauterization is for pains or necessary pain, strength and boils, which do not tolerate delay due to the fear of malice coming from those that enter through improper timing.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And this does not concern your possessions, or, children, what is valued only by the common people and foolish doctors is that for the disease which is healed by cauteries, it is not always timely, and they miss that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they think, for cauteries are nothing but a substitute for medicine that alters the complexion and dries up the humidity which is the cause of pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But still, cauteries are superior in medicine due to the speed of their effectiveness and the virtue of their operation and the greatness of their power.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that his illness may return at some time according to the condition of the patient and the location of his illness, and its nature, and what is prepared in him from the accumulation of superfluities within him, and what has reached him through his acquisition in food and similar causes; but if the illness for which cautery was administered is a subtle one involving few superfluities and humidities, such as the cautery of a tooth for pain and the like, it may not return that pain, but this happens rarely.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And the common saying is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is the saying of craftsmen, not because those who understand it think there is no cure in medicine or any other cause before cautery, but because they believe that once cautery is necessary, it is the most effective treatment.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer methods of treatment for certain illnesses, and those medicines do not suffice, and then at the end of the process, cautery is administered, and it proves effective.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And here at this point it is said that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which I grasp of the common and excessive practices of foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and its superior quality in substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place for cautery does not matter, which is absolutely not true, because I have seen it proven and corrected that this works only on certain bodies and not others. Cautery with gold can be better than with iron, as they say; however, when you use fire with gold, it is not clearly defined, since the hardness of the gold affects how much heat it can withstand, and it prepares to receive friction. If you adjust the heat, the gold will melt due to the fire, and if you place some sheets in the fire, the craftsman can work on them during this process.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And thus it is done with cautery made of iron, you should remove the pus gently and gradually according to the correctness of the procedure.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to the chapters, and I have arranged those of the head among the priorities, so that I may relieve the seeker of what they ask for.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cautery for headache due to cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery is applied to the humidity and coldness of an accidental ailment caused by these two causes, which are the cause of rheumatism and various types of flu, called corissa, affecting the head and parts of the ears with fluid discharge, excessive sleep, toothache, and throat pain, and generally all diseases that come from coldness, such as paralysis, stroke, and similar conditions in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: First, command the patient to evacuate with laxative medicine for the head purification, for three or four nights, depending on the strength of the patient and their age and habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then place him seated on a padded bench and have him rest his head on his hands.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the palm of your hand near the nose on the shaved area between his eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But when the temperature of your hand has reached it, mark that spot with a needle, and then ignite the olive wood cautery, which is made as follows:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And after that pause, place it on the marked spot, in such a way that it descends, with which the skin may be gradually stretched, and you rotate it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand gently and look at the spot, and if you see any quantity of bone already exposed, like the amount of wheat grains, then raise your hand, and if not return your hand to that tool or another of those, if it is chilled, until you can see the bone as I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the spot and let it be for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place it on the wound enclosed in leather and let it be inside until the burn scar is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the spot with a quadruple ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they say that when the plague has opened up, the arm recovers better and more quickly.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them say that the wound should be cauterized down to the bone, and the cautery should be kept until it adheres to some part of the bone.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then remove what is adhered to the bone, and then it should be treated.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that with the cautery reach to the deepest part, until it presses strongly on the bone until the bone melts, and this is the method of treating small wounds.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they consider that vapors from the head expire from that place.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let the wound be treated for a long time until it is healed and has consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two species of cautery in all cases, but only on some people out of fear; and leave that one, if you please, for it is better to preserve health when possible; for the head becomes inflamed by the solution of continuity as we have testified in other members, and especially when the constitution of the patient is cold.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first species of cautery is safer and better in my opinion; and with that one you can preserve health and well-being.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Second.
Del cauteri del cap.	On Cautery of the Head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head and this is prolonged in the patient, even after using herbs, cloths, compresses, plasters, poultices, cats, hens, and similar treatments, especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery which we have described but without any benefit from those causes, then consider whether the constitution of the patient’s head is strong in nature; and if it is not cold and shows no great sensitivity, then proceed to cauterize with another type of cautery below that one slightly.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that area on the crown of their head with a cautery until the pain is alleviated.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut open the affected area and expose the bone in the quantity that we have described, and cauterize it with a cautery at the back of the head in the place called "vas," — which is the location where the windpipe is situated.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And be careful here and do not expose the bone, for the patient will suffer great pain different from the pain of all other cauteries of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And here I will describe this cautery in its place, for it is appropriate that the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Chapter Three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On Cauterization of Non-Ancient Hemorrhoids.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When severe pain occurs in the head region or persistent pain inside the skull, it should be evacuated with medicines that purify the head, and other treatment should be administered as I have described for various diseases; and if this does not improve the condition, cauterization is then performed in two ways: either cauterization with an acute combustible medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But if you perform cauterization with a combustible medicine, then take a piece of cotton wool, soak it in the medication, and tie off both ends.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then incise the area of the pain on the temple with a lancet, cutting just deep enough to reach beneath the skin, so that it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then apply pressure to it with a bandage in a moderate compression, and leave it like that for three hours; then loosen it and remove the cotton wool, and let the wound be treated for two or three days, after which press upon it with a piece of cloth soaked in butter until the area becomes warm.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, take care of that wound with dressing so that it may heal.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, apply some medicines that burn, of which I have written in the second treatise on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But when you use cauterization with this method, here is the fire for cauterizing, of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a nail clamp, because its head is in the shape of a nail, which has some curvature, and at the middle part of it there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then press on the location of the pain, and hold your hand—so that the artery below is not adhered—and move the tool gently little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of it that adheres due to the specificity of the condition is such that half of it is adhered, raise your hand so that the artery below is not adhered, so that there is no bleeding.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak cotton in salt water and place it on the location, and leave it for three days; and then apply dry cotton with borders, and afterward take care of the wound with dressing so that it may heal.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize at the end of the radial bone according to the cautery method, and guard against cutting the artery in this proper but non-traditional procedure.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the cauterization of an ancient ulcer.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat an ulcer as we have described in the previous treatment and in the divisions of diseases, and if it does not improve, and sometimes due to the disease, what we have mentioned about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire is insufficient, then it is necessary for you to ignite the radial cautery until it becomes white-hot. Place it on the location of the pain along a line as long as half your finger or slightly more; and then move your hand once and press firmly so that it does not adhere to the artery but penetrates into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, you must be careful about the continuity of the mandible, which is necessary for chewing, and ensure that the muscle is not adhered to and the nerves which move it are not affected, and that a spasm does not occur.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the care and caution regarding the flow of blood from the artery that is being tied off, because there is fear in doing so, especially for one who does not know what they are doing and is not diligent and experienced; and leave the operation to someone else at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And here I will come to the recall of the regimen for controlling blood flow in cases involving arteries according to the usual method, in its proper place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this disease does not respond to these cauteries and the patient's condition is tolerable, cauterize in the appropriate place of the head as we have recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you perform the cauteries that we have mentioned in the chapter on the rupture of arteries with a cautery having two edges, this is a better and more effective cautery.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cautery for ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain in the ear occurs due to inflammation and is treated with laxative causes and other treatments that I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain does not improve, now use cautery. This is one called puncta, which has the following form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And apply the puncta near the fire, and move it around the entire ear as a wheel revolves, or around each part where the pain is located.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Take the cautery of the hair removal from the ear little by little until you have marked the place with it.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of these points throughout the ear, and which ones accordingly, and promptly treat the areas until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cautery of torticollis.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torticollis, which is cured by cautery, is not caused by any specific type of phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Cautery is avoided for the type that arises from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that type of torticollis with jars and capipurgi and guargarisms, and if your treatment does not confere (succeed), then it is necessary for you to cauterize the disease with three cauteries: the first should be at the root of the ear, and the second a little away from the temple, and the third should be at the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your cautery on the opposite side of the affected part, because softening occurs only in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cautery is that you cauterize it with the cautery at the side of the uppermost part of the ear, a little above the horn of the head, and on the temple another, whose length should be according to the length of the middle finger, and then place your hand with the cautery until half the quantity of the root is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the form of cautery, and it is specific to the scissor-like instrument, the form of which is laid out above.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it is even more subtle that there is a small amount as you see; and it is necessary to use a knife instead of excessive coarseness in this small amount.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And properly care for the area with water that has been previously processed until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cautery treatment for chronic apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is chronic and you treat it with water as we have said and do not induce fever through your medication, then cauterize the area using four cauteries: on top of all parts of the head; and at the point where we have mentioned, in the middle of the head; and one cautery on the nape of the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cautery is done as mentioned above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and this is better; and now it should be treated with water that you have prepared.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On the cautery treatment for forgetfulness performed with flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	It is necessary to give the patient large doses and pills at the beginning to purify and cleanse them.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then shave the patient's head completely and apply a plaster to the back of the neck, as described in the chapter on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	In some cases, cautery should be used, for that is the method of treatment.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Do this according to the order which I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if this heals the wound well, it is good; but if not, then apply three cauterizations to the rear part of his head, which should descend from the most superior part of the head down to the part nearest the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And after each cauterization, wait until the swelling of the finger subsides, and then proceed with the next cauterization.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you prefer and the condition allows it, then apply the cautery in a moderate manner; and if you wish for a stronger effect, then apply it over both sides.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then proceed with the care to ensure it heals; and let the cautery be olive-shaped as described above.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cautery of parasites and the softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Proceed with the purification of the head using shears and as we have discussed; then shave the patient's head, and afterward apply cautery in a moderate location on the head, over all parts of the head, over the rear part of it, and with three cauterizations over the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary for the illness of softening the body to do so and the patient can tolerate it and the illness is severe, then apply four cauterizations over the vertebrae of the back, and finally apply one cautery deep into the area below the armpit, and raise the skin slightly.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	For the treatment of that which should be healed, use this; and for that which should be cauterized, use olive.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cautery for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	An epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And so it is necessary to modify the brain of the patient at the beginning of the year and follow the other treatment that we have described in the division when the patient is strong and can tolerate the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who cannot tolerate medicines, then administer gentle treatments and food that purifies the brain, for several days before this, along with the improvement of diet.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the patient's head, and afterwards cauterize one area in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and with another cauterization at the occiput, and on each side of the head as well.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize as I have described, with paralysis and relaxation of the body over the cervical vertebrae and the thoracic vertebrae.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And use olive cauterization as was previously mentioned.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then use gentle cauterization according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cautery for melancholia.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholia are corrupted humidity and thick phlegm, then cauterize that part with the cauteries which we have mentioned in the case of paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholia is excess leaning towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink what purifies his brain as was mentioned earlier according to the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then make a poultice properly prepared over the circle, and then place it in the middle part of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should be seated, and held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a liniment; it is more suitable to use before sheep's wool.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that on the fire with moderate heating as needed, which the patient can tolerate when it is applied.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place that in the middle part of the head in the circle, and let it be rubbed there.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this for the patient once a week, following another regimen until he is healed; or if you prefer, cauterize that in small points as needed, but have your hand guided by a properly ordered cautery: this is a special type of cautery which moistens the brain with equilibrium.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then place that paste in cloth or in linens of chicken feathers.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cauterization of water descending in the belly.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have identified the beginning of water in the urine by the signs that I mentioned in the division, then start giving the sick person to drink water that cleanses the head, and guard him from all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make him sweat in baths for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that area with one cautery in the middle of the head; and then cauterize that area with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of water appearing in two urines, or on one side if it is the beginning of water appearing in one urine.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Inciase with one cautery all the veins and arteries that you see near the temples; and place the cauteries at a distance in the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And guard against bleeding when he is cauterized; and if you see him bleeding, stop the bleeding with some medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come to the knowledge that is in the extraction of arteries and the ligation of them and the caution against bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck near two bones with two cauteries placed backward, producing a result.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the eyes are old and constant, passing through veins and arteries that are visible on the surface of the head, and it is verified that this is cold phlegmatic excess, then cauterize in one place as we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of water accumulating in the urine, and with one cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries in the neck near two temples, and with two cauteries in the neck near two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need an addition, then cauterize that at the full length of the nail of the finger on the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter xiiii.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On Cauterization for Nasal Discharge.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat him with what we have mentioned in the division and it does not benefit from your treatment, then prepare and give the sick person cochineal to drink for three nights; afterwards, shave his head and cauterize the affected area with a medium-sized olive cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that with a carnation-sized cautery, using two cauteries above the two eyebrows, just over the hair, a little bit.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful with the cauterization so that you do not burn it excessively.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the carnation-sized cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter .xv.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On Cauterization for Softening the Eyelids.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid is softened due to illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with this lunar-shaped cautery; and this is the form of it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do so, cauterize that above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries in total, and let them be longer toward the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Do not press too hard with your instrument when using cautery, but rather to the extent that one third of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On using cautery on the eyelid when the hairs have turned inward and are piercing the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eyelid turn inward and pierce the eye, cautery is applied in two ways: either by using an instrument or by applying a combustible medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If cautery is done with fire, instruct the patient beforehand to trim their eyelashes as those of people in general, making them longer and even; and if they are piercing due to their growth from the root, then bandage the eyes so that nothing enters until the new lashes grow.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	When they have grown and become even, then instruct the patient to place their head in your lap, and gently apply a bandage over the eyelids, shaped like a maple leaf, with the beginning of the bandage near the lashes.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And gently place a piece of boiled hen's feather or mucilage of silk over the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then perform the cautery according to this method.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize over the shape you have marked, little by little, in small strokes, until the surface of the area shaped like a myrtle leaf is burned thoroughly and clearly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	A sign of health in this work is that you see the eyelid already contracted and the hairs raised around the piercing of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And thus raise your hand and wash it for three days, and then place it on the wound edge until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of that until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the hair returns due to some cause and the eyelid is relaxed, now perform the cautery on that again just as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hair remains on the eyelid below, then cauterize that until it is raised to its natural place and healed so that the hair does not touch the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery and medicinal burning are such that you command the patient to pluck the hair until it is lengthened and healed, and then make from paper or cloth the shape of a myrtle leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take known soap and one ounce of live caus (likely a typo or archaic term), and mix these causes well, and apply it quickly so that it is not rubbed; then spread this over the paper made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it on both eyes; and place a cloth-covered bandage under the eye, and the patient's head should be in your lap.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place your finger on the medicine and press it slightly so that the patient feels the sensation of the medicine, for this sensation is like being burned by fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And thus, when the swelling and biting ceases, leave off the medicine and wash with the water you mentioned; then once the biting stops, resume washing the wound with water. Then consider whether the eyelid has already risen as it was washed; if so, bind it with heat or incision because that is better. And if not, go back to applying the medicine in the place where no medicine has been applied and do not let it darken until your operation is well done and the wound contracted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then pause on the wound at the edge until the trace of the adjustment is eradicated, and then treat that with definite definition or another method until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to guard with diligent vigilance that no part of the medicine falls into the wound. And if after some days the eyelid becomes softened and any cause for hair grows in the wound, then reapply your medicine to the place where the eyelid has become softened, and properly as you did at the beginning, and then wait until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of the leaf of myrtle.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the wounds of people vary in size and magnitude, and therefore according to this, you adjust your treatment.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And the way of rectitude will not be hidden from one who studies in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cautery treatment of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat fistula with the water that we have mentioned in the sections on diseases and do not confer your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to place his head or thigh in your hand, and hold the head of a cautery between your hands but in such a way that it is neither too much nor agitated near the head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And place some cotton in an eggshell or in a powder of petals on the wound.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then heat the cautery which has this form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is hollow, as it has the shape of a reed or eagle's feather, with one end through which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it can penetrate into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to be as thin as a thread.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But the one that is hollow is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and let some of the pus come out and dry it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place the cautery, which should be well heated, on it, and hold it there for a moment but not too long, so that you do not burn the wound or disturb the patient, and then place the cautery on the edges of the wound and cauterize it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of your cauterization it penetrates to the bone, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cauterization once or twice if necessary; and leave it like that for three days, and then place some cotton on it and around it with a drying ointment until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If after ten days it has not healed, then at that time apply acute corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed, according to what is convenient in its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula, which the ancients first described: enter into the location of the fistula and make an incision in it; then apply to that fissure finely powdered material made from its form. And pour into it one ounce of molten lead; hold your hand gently but firmly so that the pus does not come out where the molten lead reaches; and you must place over the wound cotton soaked in egg white or water, because lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer traction through the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose as it will come into its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cauterization of the cleft of the buttocks.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Fissures often occur in the lips, and more commonly in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those fissures with what we have mentioned in the divisions and your treatment is not effective, then use small knife cauterization according to this form that will be described:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let the sharpness of it be according to the fineness of the blade.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then apply that hot instrument carefully to those fissures until the cauterization reaches the base of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Let the treatment of that which is inside with wax be carried out so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cautery treatment for a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When there is an abscess in the uvula or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth below, and it causes pain, and then it breaks, and becomes old, and pus flows and a fistula is formed, and when you treat that one and it does not improve with treatment, now you must ignite a cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, and then place that heated part into the track of the fistula, and do this so that the fire reaches the beginning of it; and at last do this once or twice. And afterwards treat it as we have said for internal treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the fistula is severed and heals, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to expose the location and remove the corrupted bone as will be described in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the cautery treatment of teeth and on softening the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are unhealthy, and you treat them with medicines but without success, now place the tip of the malatue (a tool) in your mouth, and then ignite the cautery whose form will be described shortly. Place the quill (a thin rod or tube) over the tooth and insert the ignited cautery into it quickly, and hold it with your hand for a short time until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then take your hand away, and then repeat the cauteries as often as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out, for the bad tooth is hardened and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cautery for toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to coldness, or there is decay or worm damage, and if you do not wish to treat it with medicine, then the cautery should be applied in two ways: either with a cow's horn or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with a horn is when you take a cow's horn and heat it over charcoal, then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of the horn, and then immerse that heated horn in the hot horn until it is warm, and place it quickly on the painful tooth before it cools.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	Then repeat that several times until the effect of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, soak wool or cotton in the aforementioned horn and place it on the painful tooth, and then apply heated iron to it until the heat reaches the source of the pain in the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, when using cautery with fire, you should attend to the length of the tube made of lead or iron, and it should be of such a size that the intensity of the heat does not reach the patient's mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	From the heating of the cautery, the form of which will be described, and place it on the tooth until the cautery is rubbed enough; and do this several times so that the pain subsides either on that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it happens that by pressing that cautery, the patient fills their mouth with good saliva and holds this for an hour, then spits it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize as much as you wish according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On Cauterization of Hemorrhoids.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hemorrhoids are full of phlegm and humors that resist digestion despite medication and you wish to aid their digestion gently, then you heat the cautery according to the form of which is described below. It has two open ends so that the smoke can escape; hold the cautery by one end, and place the heated part on the hemorrhoid once, or another time if needed, until it reaches the root of the hemorrhoid.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the hemorrhoid is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the hemorrhoid, and after that leave it for three days, then place it on the wound in saliva until what the fire has burned is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of it with applications, bandages, and dressings until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the cannula or cautery for this purpose is as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On cautery for sore throats and on the constriction of veins.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humors from the veins flow into the channel of the lungs, and especially when this is due to cold complexion, it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that area near the root of the throat.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to apply the cautery to the throat, nor burn more than a little of the skin.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that area with another cautery near the joint of the neck at the last vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And let the cautery be made of iron according to the previous method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area with what has been prescribed until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On cautery for lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are due to cold and humid humors, and the patient does not have fever or consumption but has an old illness, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the clavicle in the places mentioned; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples; and let the cauteries be made of iron according to the previous method.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, your cautery can be of the punctate type, which is called a puncta, the form of which precedes in the treatment of earache.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Let there be punctures into cavities for those; and immediately treat that with the method that is mentioned so that it may heal.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And there should be three applications of cautery for that cauterization which is done on it: in one session, you can perform three cauterizations according to this method:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On cauterization of the tonsils, which is at the top of the throat.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the top of the throat is displaced due to humid and lubricating fluids and does not return to its proper position after being displaced until it reaches the usual place where it should be, and then by a slight movement it becomes displaced again as we have witnessed, at such times you must first reduce the displacement, and then make the patient lie on his back or on his side; and then lift the chin, which is in the inner part of the tonsil, towards the upper parts with your left hand if the joint is dislocated inwardly.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the cautery having two ends; and this is the form of it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the chin until it penetrates to the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will come out when four cauteries are performed.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And do it subtly according to the amount needed; and this is the form of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And at times it is adjusted according to this method, and thus the cauteries are eight.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then pause after the cautery and apply something salty to it, and then make the patient rest quietly, and do not move the limb much for some time until it is healed.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is at the upper parts and it is done thus, then cauterize above the muscle with a nail or with pointed cautery, for the joint is confirmed and the moisture is dissipated and the injury is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On Cauterization of the Stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is blood in the stomach, rub and apply moist substances that match its composition and multiply them inside until it reaches a sufficient amount. If you continue with the methods of treatment without confirming their effectiveness, then it should be assumed that the injury involves two sides being sucked inward, causing contraction of the muscles and other parts. At this point, cauterize using three cauteries: place one cauterization below the feet by the length of a finger, and use two cauteries on either side of the first cauterization to form a triangular shape; ensure there is enough space between them so they do not cause rotting.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cauterization is equal to two-thirds the thickness of the rib.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the shape of the cauterization be according to this form without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle part of the stomach according to this form; and this shall be a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach should be cauterized with points for one who is frightened by this cauterization: you should mark points on the stomach according to the quantity you wish with a needle, and then cauterize those points; afterward, treat it with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the cautery of an inflamed testicle.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain arises in the testicle due to coldness or moisture or excessive flatulence, and if it deviates from its normal position by excessive prolapse, and is treated with water as we have mentioned and does not respond to that, then the patient should lie on his back, and apply three cauteries according to this form and quantity above the testicle below the hypochondriac region, while in the lying posture of a person.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each cauterization should be according to the thickness of a finger, and the length of the cauteries should be according to the length of the right arm.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not compress the area around the cauteries.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of water used is equal to half the length of the forearm and it is not sufficiently adjusted; and if the patient stands on his feet; and if he does not stand, then he should sit, having extended his legs, and raise his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to perform these cauteries with a knife cautery when you possess subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to press too hard during the cautery, and let it be immersed in the length of the entire forearm so that the whole body is immersed up to the armpits, since the arm here is delicate; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the Incision of an Abscess of the Testicle with Cauterization.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When you find an inflammation or abscess in the testicle and want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the testicle or in the tunica, then if it is in the flesh of the testicle, the patient will show heaviness and pain without sharpness.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunica of the testicle, then the pain will be sharp and often exhausts the physician's ability to treat it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, the patient should be positioned on his back; then approach to feel the location of the abscess; and then apply the cautery which resembles a reed, the form of which was described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that cautery until the entire area is consumed, until it reaches the cicatrix, until it causes scabbing.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that as you would for the treatment of other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not appropriate to use this form of cautery except for those whose study in the art of medicine is extensive and who have known many diseases; but even then, one should only attempt this experiment a few times before relying on it, and it is better to be cautious.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the Cauterization of Hemorrhoids.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancients said that cauterization of hemorrhoids with the root of artemisia should be done according to this method: take a dry and long stalk of artemisia, about as long as your finger, and as thick as the breadth of your finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Here is the translation:
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not think that you should apply your hand to the cautery unless it is in the open part of the wound.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And just as some ancient authors say that some men use a cautery made of iron resembling a ray and ignite it, then place it in the location between the shoulder blades, so that we may reach the abscess with it and excise the pus, as we have said regarding the testicular abscess.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this perforation with the cautery there is no need for fear, for one dies immediately or an accident occurs at the place where the fistula was made, and there is no healing.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cautery of the ulcer.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the disease of the ulcer as we have said about treatment in division and do not combine your cure, then there are three ways to apply the cautery, all of which are effective. The first is that you make three or four lines of cautery according to the length of the ulcer, following the figure of the cauterization of the testicle, the form of which has been described previously.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And there should be a space between each cautery of the width of a finger or a little more, and the method of the cautery should be the same method that we have described for the cauterization of the testicle.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not apply your hand to the cautery; and let the patient lie on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another method of cauterizing, which is to ignite the cautery with two vertical lines, as we have described in the chapter on the dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the side where the ulcer is located, so that it receives the weight of the patient's left side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And so raise it as high as you do when you lift the chain according to the length of the body, so that cautery may be done according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two ends, which have been ignited, into the opening where the chain penetrates from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries have been performed.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery that has three ends.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then take care of the cautery so that it does not shake or move for too many days, for it is more convenient than the other causes previously mentioned in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On Cauterization of Hydrops.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cautery is not applied to hydrops except in a certain proper manner.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the hydrops using the methods of treatment that we have described in the division and do not conform to your treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel, one cauterization over the stomach, another over the liver, another over the spleen, two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, one cauterization on the right foot, and another over the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the sharpness of the chain.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the cautery undisturbed so that it remains still for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	If you do not remove the corrupt substance from the wound before applying heat with water which is appropriate for joining the two edges of the wound, it should be done quickly with the help of healing agents.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be in the form of a nail as described above, and it should be oval-shaped for cauterizing the two sides as previously described according to its form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On Cauterization of the Belly and Other Things.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the belly is swollen with apostemes and filled with watery phlegm, it is appropriate to cauterize the belly on both sides with hot water that is between the ring finger and the middle finger, and raise your hand with the cautery without twisting it; then lift your hand but do not return it completely, as the watery phlegm will be expelled.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery should be in this form: And then place two cauteries on both sides of the area, and at each side, a cautery should be made with the tip of the cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be according to the length of the area: place one below and the other at the middle part of the area; and on each side, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound uncovered for some time so that any fluid can drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then treat it with the causes we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On cauterization of abdominal wounds.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When abdominal wounds are to be treated and humidity within weakens the vital forces, which are digestive and retentive in nature and exist in the stomach and bowels, it is treated with these methods of treatment without hesitation. Sometimes the patient suffers from cauterization that exhibits a weakened vitality; at such times, cauterize that area with a large cautery over their stomach according to what has been previously described for stomach cauterization, using the circular cautery and four small cauteries around the navel, or a small nail-shaped cautery; or place one large cautery on either side of the navel.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if at times there is an excess of moisture and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that area over the pubis and around the bowels, and gently place two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal region, for this is a perfect method from which you will not deviate in error.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When such is the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or one caused by thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they are treated as we have described in the division without hesitation regarding the proper treatment, then cauterize with three small triangular cauteries below the spine near the two sites mentioned, and place a cautery above the navel, each on either side.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that the patient's stomach is weak and their food undigested, and their face appears inflamed or congested, then cauterize that area over the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; place one cautery on the spleen and another on the liver with a nail-shaped cautery, let the effects of the cauteries work for some time, and subsequently treat them so they may heal.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cautery of the artery near the removal of the tooth.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you extract a tooth, immediately use fire to apply the cautery that resembles a nail.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Near the place where you have extracted the tooth, introduce the cautery into it and move it gently until it reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Do this once or twice, for if the tooth continues to bleed excessively, then cauterize each one as we have described, and afterward treat them with remedies until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you use a large cautery on the gum, it is better for healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cautery of fistulas that are formed in the nature of the flesh in various parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not respond to the treatment we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, heal it with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	When someone has a fistula in the flesh that is old and filled with corrupted pus and moisture, then what should be done first is to probe it gently, and then determine the depth of the fistula using the previously mentioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then apply the cautery that resembles a nail with fire.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then place the ignited cautery into this fistula according to the extent to which the probe entered.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then apply the cautery to those corrupt parts until they are consumed completely in one application or two or three, as your need requires.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And guard against burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula leads to the body of the bladder or to the body of the bowel, then you must be cautious about all these areas; and do not perform this procedure unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you think it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of the place so that it may heal.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed, and the substances are removed from it, and it remains this way for a long time, then you will know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the substances do not come out from it, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the vicinity of corrupted bone, or falls under those causes which will be recalled in their place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On Cauterization of Ulcers.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When ulcers cause pain due to friction or excessive swelling, and because of this the patient's condition is worsened, then it is necessary to cauterize them with a cautery on each ulcer using a nail-shaped cautery about which there will be mention.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And apply the cautery again after a short while, so that there will be three cauterizations in total, and thus they will be more effective in aiding recovery.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When it happens that the bladder becomes weak and soft due to friction and moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, at this time cauterize in the area near the pubic region, where the hair begins. Cauterize once on the right side and once on the left side as well.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cauterization be according to the amount of urine retained; and cauterize once in the lowest part of either side, or twice if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let it be a cautery shaped like a nail as is described.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is friction and moisture in the stomach, and because of this intercourse is prohibited, and their menstruation is corrupted, and its provocation is delayed, and pain occurs due to the occurrence of it, at this time it is necessary that the area be cauterized three times around the navel, as we have said regarding the cauterization of the bladder; and once in the lowest part on either side, or twice, and let the cautery be shaped like a nail.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On cauterization of the dislocation of the joint.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When there is moisture deeply effused in the area of the joint, and due to causes that make it leave its proper place, the sign of this is that one part is extended beyond the other when compared.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The place for reduction is found where the bone lies.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then when you cauterize the malady over the part of the bone, cauterize it in a similar circular manner, after you have marked with a tent on the circumference of the part as it is revolved, so that the part may fall at the middle point of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And this is the cautery whose form precedes in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize the area with three cauterizations using a large olive-shaped cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the quantity of the spiculation of the entire wound; and then take care of that inner part so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the part of the bone, and it is caused by friction and humidity, the malady is treated as we have said and does not require further treatment if it is old. However, if there is an excess of thick humors, then you should purge them with fetid pills or artificial ones or similar remedies; and afterwards cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of the cautery in this case is according to two methods: either use a cautery with combustible medicines, or use fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It is done according to two known methods. One of which is that you cauterize the area over the part of the bone with three triangular cauteries as follows; and make them with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the spaces which are between each cautery be the quantity of the thickness of a finger, and if the cauteries are olive or grain.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	And sometimes in some cases the cauteries should be on the top of the head, where there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, cauterize the circle from which the form precedes in the cautery of the dislocation of the joint, so that it is a continuous circle and burn the length of the entire tendon.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cautery in cases where pain is attached to the joint and does not extend into the surrounding tissue.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it extends into the surrounding tissue, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the tissue at the location where you would direct the malady that is the pain; and one cauterization on the bone, four fingers away from the wild part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is circular, let the depth of the cautery be according to the length of the tendon.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the malady directs that the pain extends into the area near the toes of the foot, then cauterize there with two cauteries at three points or four or more if you deem it necessary.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the malady directs that the pain is below the elbow on the tissue, then cauterize there with one circular cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in every cautery that you do not end the cautery until you burn a nerve or large artery, and thereby harm the patient badly or cause contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen one and another of those who cauterized over the nail and ended in the cauterization, and the bed of fire inflated until the tumor reached the flesh, and fire perforated and corrupted all the flesh.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And as a result of a severe abdominal condition, and as a consequence thereof death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise ones said in the cauterization of any cauterization which this is the method: make it resemble a circle of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and let its depth be according to the thickness of a date stone or somewhat less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle be another one a third smaller; and let the space between them be the quantity of a mustard seed; and let those circles be placed from two parts; and let the length of those bars be one or two mustard seeds, and make on those edges an iron margin properly fitted to the circles; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	And then ignite it in the fire until it becomes red and sparks, and then place it on the affected part of the body, with the malady located over the skin.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And thus cauterize that area three times in one session.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave that area for three days; then plaster the area around it and leave the wound covered for more than ten days; and then treat that area with ointments until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: Oh, sons, of this kind of cautery we have used little out of fear of its severity, and for that few have found those who are cautious about it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	Here is the translation:
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Here is the translation:
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if you measure the spaces which are between each finger according to the size of the width of a finger; and let them be uneven below and above, and let them contain each other in this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place your hand over the part of the wound where the patient is sitting, and apply pressure with your hand; then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and let that amount be heated little by little over a small fire for about one hour, until the patient's biting sensation and buzzing in the area—like being bitten by fire—ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away the hot water from all of the wound with cool water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then treat him for three days and place a dressing on it until the blackness of the inflammation subsides, and continue treating this for several more days until pus forms; this is part of proper treatment.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat him with herbs until he is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends to the chest or the armpit, treat it as you would for a wound equally, according to how it is treated when water is involved.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkaline and another substance not yet extinguished from both parts, mix them and pour into a new container of which the lower part is perforated by a small hole, according to the amount that will enter into the preparation.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	After leaving the fundus of the wound, pour another wave of cleansing liquid over it and sprinkle with alkaline substance, then cover it with living wet cloth dipped in cold water which grasps those parts tightly. And when you understand that they are well moistened with it, leave the poultice to descend from sharp water at the place below the returning wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then gather all that water and pour it over another living cloth and another renewed alkaline substance, because at this time it will have great sharpness, which is administered in many medical operations and in cauterization of other limbs, which operation involves fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And among the medicines with which it is cauterized broadly are items such as vinegar and honey diluted with water and cloth soaked in soap, mixed together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Galen recounts the operation and the treatment by which pain in the sciatic nerve and vein is cured, and magnifies greatly its effectiveness, saying that no other cure is necessary, and that it heals permanently as described, for he found this method effective in baths and treatments.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And let it be prepared from some green herbs, and if green is not available, use fresh figs; mix them with a little flour and apply it to the affected area where the pain is, either on the thigh, buttock, or hip, and bind it.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it remain for three hours or for the duration that the patient estimates as necessary for the adjustment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put that person in a bath, and when their body is relaxed, have them move to dry land, for the pain will cease and they will be healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that one should not apply cautery with these medicines except immediately after evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	And Celsus says that when using the skin of a goat as a patch for the narrow vein, it benefits greatly; and let the cautery be used in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes and on the stones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And take dry goat skin and burn it over fire until it turns to charcoal; then place it on the wool and let it spread over it.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And continue doing this until the sensation of the bite reaches the joint and the pain subsides.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called cow cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On Cauterization for Toothache.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain in the teeth occurs due to various causes, such as from decay or impact or excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, from the infusion of moist and corrosive matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery is not used for any other condition but this specific one, which is caused by the infusion of corrosive matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, after evacuating the harmful matter with pills and similar remedies, one should apply them over the tooth where the pain is, three lines according to its latitude. Then place on each line up to five cauteries or more, depending on the tolerance of the patient and the potency of the remedy.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let cautery be made with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or with four pointed cauteries in this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On Cauterization at the Beginning of Chilblains.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	This disease often affects small children; the sign of its beginning in children is that it appears on their structure, especially around the navel with elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you will notice that the last vertebra of the back and the bones around it are beginning to protrude above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a round cautery in this manner:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	so that the cautery covers the entire part of the vertebra evenly.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines away.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And immediately treat the area so that it heals as we have described.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But be careful not to administer cautery on chilblains that are caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When pain in the joints is caused by the friction of humors which are infused into each member of the body, at times when pains occur in the feet, it is customary for doctors to apply a poultice properly.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus, how it is treated when gout is caused by friction is done in a way of treatment and not just removing the pain, at times the removal is done with cauterization.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is when you cauterize that area for evacuation around the joint of the foot with caustic substances.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is an olive cauterization, which has the following form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make a puncture on the fascia of the foot, then do so with a puncture cauterization.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains rise into the toes or other joints, and you wish to treat this, then cauterize each toe with three cauterizations or four from all sides with this olive cauterization.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you wish to use these cauterizations and find them necessary for you, then cauterize and do not press too hard with your hand on the cauterization before, but only around the specificity of the joint.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains rise into the second toe, then administer the cauterizations which we have mentioned in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the sole of the foot and it is called podagra, then puncture around the toes as they curve, puncturing those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if there remain pains in the said areas, prick around the follicles on each and on the web of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains persist for several days in the joints or muscles, then cauterize them all around the affected areas.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And if you do not expel the harmful substances through good regimen and reception of medicines, for if proper regimen is followed and these cauterizations are performed, healing will occur, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On Cauterization of Fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When you suspect a fracture in the thighs and intestines are exposed before the wound, and this happens nearby, then it is necessary for you to order the patient to fast on that day and use laxatives so that the opening from the abdomen closes.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And have the patient lie close to you on their back, and instruct them to keep their breath held or to cough so that the wound or the intestines appear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return to what you have said and mark the fracture on the bone of the thigh, identifying the extremity of which appears similar to half a circle at the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then prepare the cautery, which has the following form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it becomes red and emits sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then reduce the intestine or wound to its normal position, and then place a bandage over it so that it does not dry out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And you have put between the things of the invalid a cushion, and place it under his back, and another under his feet, which he may hold with his hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery over that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and enter it where you can reach the bone of the patient within the muscle; and repeat it on another occasion if you did not succeed on the first attempt to reach the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe carefully the condition of the bowel during your cautery, that you do not burn it, so that upon the invalid there does not come death or another great harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you do not have the bone with the cautery, do not proceed with your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is appropriate that the cautery for children be delicate according to their age and size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then take care of the place of the cautery for three days until the burn scar begins to heal.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of him with other remedies until he is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on his back for forty days until the place is sealed and the plague is contained.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is appropriate to restrict the patient's nutrition according to the length of time required for his recovery, so that the bowel does not protrude due to excessive strain.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then when you want to lift him after forty days, administer it carefully and have him remain for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let it be reduced by work and from filling the belly with food and drink, and from raising the voice vehemently, for when he uses this regimen of complete healing he will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will speak about the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, you should not delay, but cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and take what is excised from the wound as we have said, one-third of it; and then treat that part as we have described, and there is no adjustment necessary.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some earlier authors said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this form, as it is marked with a template:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and draw a line that you follow along the latitude above the navel, and another line above it; then place your hand with a nail-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is faster and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the cautery treatment for torsion.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When you find in some members due to falling or impact that there is pain and this pain persists for a long time and does not improve with medication, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And let the cautery for each member be according to its size and smallness, its strength and weakness, and the location of the torsion and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If it heals with the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on it. For it is customary for such pains to be punctured in a member near where they occur, so you must achieve this with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On Cauterization for Leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	In some cases, leprosy can be treated effectively with cauterization, but it is less effective for the type of leprosy that arises from the putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And therefore, when you wish to cauterize that person, consider whether the leprosy is contagious and if it can be treated with what we have discussed in the division and does not exist elsewhere. If you fear that the corruption may spread throughout their body and entire composition, then cauterize them on the head with a hot iron: place one at the middle of the head, and another further down near the forehead; two on both temples; and one at the back, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	Finally, place the cauterization a little deeper so that it slightly presses into the bone, causing the affected layers of skin to be displaced, thus easing the expulsion of thick vapors; and cauterize over the area as needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the body and is clearly manifest, then you should cauterize those areas with the irons we have mentioned for the head; and cauterize one spot at the end of the nose, two spots on each cheek, two on both sides of the neck vertebrae, six on the back vertebrae, a large one near the hip bones, one on each hip bone, two on each thigh, one on each leg, two on each elbow and one on each wrist, two on each knee, two on each muscle, and two on each tendon of the feet; cauterize all the joints of the fingers and toes, as well as each heel, and the armpits.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And guard against the nerves which are above the heel so that you do not burn them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes cautery is applied with one cautery on the bone of the pubis, and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as the others do, because the body of the patient is already numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is appropriate that the cauteries be large or few according to the members and joints, depending on the properties of the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply the cautery with flour of barley mixed with honey, and continue the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On Cauterization for Inducing Stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let the heat of the cautery enter the depth of the skin a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area with an ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes numbness in some part of the body, whether it affects the limbs or the spine, and the condition of the nerves that control that member, is cauterized to alleviate the numbness.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Let no one undertake this except one who is skilled in the anatomy of the limbs and of the emergence of the nerves throughout the moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On cauterization of ulcers that become indurated.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When ulcers are old and do not respond to any of the applications of medicine, then you should cauterize upon that part which you cauterized previously, for a short period according to the quantity needed until its whiteness and color change, and its color is altered.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then apply to that part flour mixed with peas and olive oil, and leaves of arnica, and pigeon blood or swallow blood, a portion of each, and all are blended together. Then place a cloth upon it until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter L.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On cauterization of cancer.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize around it with a round cautery as it is surrounded.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the deepest cautery in the middle part; but I have not seen this done, for I fear it may cause an ulcer, and I have observed this several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is safer to cauterize around it in a circle as we have said, or with multiple cautery applications.
Capitol .li.	Chapter LI.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of cauterization for hemorrhoids.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When hemorrhoids are delayed in maturation, and this is due to the excess moisture in that area or because of the patient's condition, being old and decrepit with little blood, or because of the time; if you wish to hasten the maturation of the hemorrhoids, then cauterize around them with small punctures; and afterwards apply something that will cause them to mature more quickly.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to perforate with the cautery, then use fire to heat the cautery which has this shape; and place it in the middle of the hemorrhoid until it penetrates the tissue.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is applied at a location that is farther away, so that the arm remains safe; and then treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LII.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of cauterization for corrosive conditions.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrodent is a mobile corruption in the limb, which corrodes as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see the corrodent in a place where it can tolerate cautery with fire, then heat the cautery and make small, large punctures as is appropriate in the location where the corrodent is present.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize it thoroughly until you eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause for it to remain.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then dress it for three days, and apply olive oil mixed with other substances to the cauterized areas three times a day until all scars are eradicated and all corruption is eliminated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	For the treatment of that part where flesh grows.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	If after three days the flesh that has grown is healthy and there is no corruption, it is good; but if not, then immediately apply cauterization to what is rotten in the corrupted places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosive is the medicine for some parts with acute conditions, for that is the method instead of cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But cauterization with fire works quickly and effectively.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And thus I have described the treatment with acute medicine in the division, and therefore choose that when it seems appropriate to you.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On Cauterization of Joints and Other Similar Areas.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Often in the lower parts below the foot there is a malady called a joint, which is caused by swelling and inflammation that affects the foot; and cauterization for this condition can be done in two ways: with fire or with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But cauterization with fire is done by heating the concave cautery, resembling a ring, which is made of iron according to the size of the joint in all parts, and it should be finely polished.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place the heated cautery on the joint, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the joint until the cautery reaches the depth of the joint.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave it for three days until it begins to form scabs.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Take a plaster with wild mallows torn apart with salt and let the plaster be placed upon it for one night, for thereby its roots will be eradicated.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if you do not convert it, and spots appear on the surface of the body, mostly in the flesh and the bones, then when you administer cauterization with water, take a tube made of earthenware or iron or copper, and place it over the wound; then pour some hot water into the tube, and hold it tightly, and rotate it by pressing your hand all around, so that the edge of the tube is applied to the root of the wound; and as the hot water runs along the edges of the wound's root, wait for a short time until the hot water bites slightly after an hour, then remove it, for the wound with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And do this with each one alternately until you come over all those spots on the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then treat the pus once the roots of the wounds have been eradicated with the water from the ointments that generate flesh.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On Cauterization of Tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you find a tremor due to friction in the nerves or fever causing friction, or for some other similar reason, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one caustic; and at the ankles, and above the stomach, apply an olive-shaped caustic.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And when the shaking subsides, hasten the health of the patient.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter .lv.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cautery of white spots on the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When on the body white spots and pus-filled blisters appear, which are formed from thick corrupted matter; therefore, at the beginning of their appearance, it should be cauterized over the entire head of the fistula with a fine cautery made of laurel wood, the end of which is extended over fire; or with long eagle's claws; or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes the cautery is applied immediately at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and they are not considered effective unless the excess is disrupted, after which they heal from those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But it is necessary that this be done near evacuation with phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the cautery of accidental blood flow due to cutting an artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Often there is a flow of blood from an artery that has been cut due to the plague which is inside, or near the beginning of abscesses or cautery of the limb, and in similar cases, it is difficult to control that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	When such a thing happens to anyone, immediately apply your hand to the opening of the artery, and press on it with your thumb until the bleeding stops, keeping pressure so that no more blood escapes.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place in the fire some olive cauters, small and large, by number many, and blow upon them until they are well ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take from them one small or one large, depending on the location and the condition where the artery is ruptured, upon that vein hastening before you have drawn breath, and hold the cauterium until it is heated and constricted that blood.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you move your hand and remove the cauterium, then take another cauterium quickly from those which in the fire are prepared, and thus do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is constricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and that it does not cause other harm.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to constrict the blood then in those cases, especially when the artery is large, unless you use one of four methods: either by cauterization as we have mentioned, or by extraction when it has not been extracted, for when it is extracted the extremities are burned and the blood is constricted, or bind it with honey or a strong bandage, or apply medicines that have the virtue of restricting blood; and strengthen them with a cushion and proper constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But he who administers proper constriction with bandages and by wrapping in cloths or by positioning burning substances and similar methods, should do so cautiously and slowly.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if this happens to someone and there is no physician present or medicine available, then gently press with your index finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand that a great constriction is needed within so that the blood stops from the main part of the wound, and do not move your finger over the artery; and sprinkle above the artery with cold water until the blood coagulates and thickens; and then decide whether cauterization or medicine is necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Beginning the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On incision and piercing and about phlebotomy and plasters and their kinds.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	In the first chapter we have already said everything about every illness in which it is convenient to use cautery with fire and combustible medicine, and the occasions and causes of them, and the instruments necessary for the forms of the cauterizations; and I have arranged the chapters on subincision under the head.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter in that manner, so that the reader may be grateful for it, dealing with what has been asked about.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, listen, son, and learn that in this chapter it is the same as what was in the first chapter about cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for this reason it is necessary to be very cautious, because in the operation which is in this chapter many things can lead to excessive bleeding, whether from blood or from other vital fluids due to the aspersion of the vein or incision over an abscess or opening for drainage or purging a plaster or extraction of gravel or starting a stone and their like.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And with all of those, fear and trembling accompany them, and in the worst cases of their kind, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that such a thing does not fall upon you, for some cases depend on your methods, as many diseases require different approaches.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And among them are some who become angry about their illness and are close to death because of the vehemence of what they find in their illness, and due to the length of their illness, and the illness itself is a sign that means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among those is he who gives you his possessions and says, hoping for that from him health, and the woman's illness is fatal.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore it does not become you to consent to him who comes to you in accordance with this method; and let your caution be greater than your greed and your rapacity; and do not assume any cause over that without proper certain knowledge which verifies what is yours, and to whom by succession praise is due.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the cure of all your patients prognosis and indication of him to whom health is converted, for in that you have helpers towards acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, my children, may God inspire your mind and not deprive you of direction and protection, for this is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have arranged this chapter distinctly by chapters as it is preceded in the chapter of cauterization, concerning the cure of the head among other things, so that you may be pleased with what you ask about this and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often affects children after birth when the nurse presses the child's head too forcefully.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it happens for hidden causes that are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have seen this illness only in children; and in all those whom I saw it led to death, and thus it seemed to me to be a deadly work in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	I saw that a child had his head filled with water, and the head was always so swollen inside that even Caesar could not have surpassed it in size, and more than that, the moisture increased inside to the point of death by fire.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is either aggregated between the membrane and the bone, or it is aggregated below the bone on the skull.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For if the moisture is between the membrane and the bone and the abscess is small, now it is necessary for you to cut in the middle part of the head a fissure horizontally, and let the length of the fissure be about two fingers so that the moisture can flow, and this is the shape of the incision:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, now there are two incisions made in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is below the bone, the sign of this is that you see the seams of the head covered all around and the water is squeezed out when you press it with your hand at the surface but not inside, and it does not return immediately.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	It is necessary for you to cut in the middle part of the head with three incisions made in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	and immediately the incision extracts all the moisture; and then close the incisions with bandages and plasters; and then cover it with oil and vinegar for five days, and then loosen the bindings and treat the wound with tinctures and ointments, and bind the head with equality; and eat the illness away with dry food of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which you should consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of fluid, for sometimes it may be better on the occiput, or in front, or on the right side, or on the left; therefore pay attention where the abscess appears and the accumulation of fluid, and do this as best suits your ability.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and let blood flow, lest the illness worsen due to that loss of blood and evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On the incision of arteries near the ears, called hilaesse.
Capitol segon.	Chapter II.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When treating certain catarrhs or rheums in the feet or legs, and this is an old practice, and if you do not seek to cure them with medicines, then the last resort in this case is to cut these two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore it is necessary when you wish to incise those arteries that the patient shakes their head, and then rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then secure the patient's neck with a cloth; and then feel where the pulse is taken; and the locations of each near the places below the ears, which are hidden in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then place your thumb on the artery, and then incise each one with a sharp scalpel, making an incision gradually penetrating into the bone, and do this according to the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the spatum before the artery and cut it where it divides into parts above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be about two fingers wide, for when any vein is cut, the blood flows out in a pulsating manner, which comes out by frequent spurts.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear in the incision, now you should measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers, and then feel with your finger, and make an entry into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And the amount of blood that should be let is a quantity of one vi (a unit of measurement), and it should be more or less according to what appears, depending on the strength of the patient and the fullness of the artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the condition, and if there remains on the bone any cause of swelling, now cut this so that it does not lead to an abscess from cauterization.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the dressing with poultices and bandages of cloth, and then care for it with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When someone suffers from severe headache or acute migraine due to excessive humidity in the brain and the condition of the arteries in the temples, or a similar severe pain, and if treatment with medicine does not provide relief, then we resort to these illnesses to the extraction of arteries in the temples or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	Here is the translation:
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then tie the part of the patient tightly with some cloth; and immediately rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until it becomes clear to you the artery distinctly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And now take the probe which has this shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then carefully peel the skin with ease until you reach the artery; and there place it and extract it to the appropriate parts until you have extracted it from the skin and revealed that of the tunics which lie beneath it, from all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is fine, then wrap it at its extremity with something, and then cut a part of it according to the amount by which the extremities are extended and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, for if they were not cut, the blood would not rise at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then remove about one ounce of blood up to three ounces.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then ensure that you tie it in two places with very strong silk thread or cords, and do not allow it to putrefy before the consolidation of the wound and thus cause a flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut away the excess that is between the two ligatures; and do this either at that hour or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone or use a knife-shaped cautery until the extremities are cut, and this will serve as a substitute for that procedure.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to do this work unless the patient has a fever or is of overheated complexion; for cautery is among those causes that help to finish off humors, and therefore it is better at such times.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And it is appropriate for the extraction of arteries that they place in an antiseptic location, and let them lie upon decently prepared lint, and nearby there should be applied dry medicines that make flesh grow and warm applications until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if during the operation blood should flow from the artery, then you should immediately work to constrict that blood, either by cauterization, or by filling the location with lint, and press firmly until the blood is restrained.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those means is available to you at the moment, then place your thumb upon the location until the blood is constricted, and apply the area with water of extreme coldness until the pain subsides, and bind it as needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is more effective in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two probes, after which you mark both locations with a tenta, and then place some ignited material within until they reach the bone and divide the vein into two places, so that it stretches what is between its extremities, as they are not fully consolidated by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	 And the sharpness of the two probes should be exemplary.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if you make them slightly less sharp than two probes, it is better, for if they are as sharp as two probes, they tend to tear the flesh too quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is a swelling in those areas, the heat of the fire is applied to them and the flesh is quickly excised.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all other works and quicker.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the spaces which are between two ribs be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of acute and acidic tears from the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When such acidic tears occur, and if it is the condition of those veins which are over the head of the person, and you do not find any cause for the cure through medicine in this matter, often the face of the sick person turns red, and they feel a crawling sensation on their forehead as if ants were moving there, and their eyes from this become weakened, so much so that even their eyelashes can be seen clearly, and the eyelids are scorched by the sharpness of the tears. The ancient masters used to perform this operation for such cases, and did not postpone such a cure.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the sick person to shave the hair on their forehead, and then make three incisions equally spaced across the forehead according to its length.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little beyond the movement of the tears that flow through the lacrimal passage, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful not to cut into the arteries that are on both sides, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jawbones.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision be the quantity of three of those mentioned.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of prepared lint or dry cloth with which to absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatula between two sharp points, which is used for this form of incision.
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the part where the plates come together at the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise all the tissue that is between two incisions with the scalpel that is over the bone, and then perform this mid incision between the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then spread this spatula and insert into the first incision another time with another instrument called a chisel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And with the sharp edge cut through the flesh attached to the tissue, and with its blunt side within the bone, insert it until you reach the mid fissure, and dissect all the vessels that run from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	But the incision should be continued to where the tissue appears, and then do this at the mid fissure into the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the amount of blood that flows is equal, press the places where clotted blood has collected.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then cut into each fissure with dry old wood shavings, and apply powder mixed with vinegar and oil and sweet wine, and dressings that will not cause a suppurative sore.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of hot water or dew, and then treat it with an ointment of basil, rose oil, and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of phlegm through catharsis and the expulsion of fluids from the inner parts of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When you see acute and continuous bleeding through catharsis, and often the fluids of the patient are exhausted and small, and the care for them is debilitated, with the eyelids ulcerated and in their place hair loss, and at the temples there is sharp pain and subsequent exhaustion, then from these accidents you know that the substances and catharsis do not come but from veins within the inner parts.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for these conditions is as follows: that you order the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in the middle of the forehead, a small one in width (and start from the temple on the left side towards the right temple; and this cut should go through the bone; extend your hand from the temples which are close to the chewing muscles), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth and then fill between the two edges of the incision with wool or pieces of cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply powdered herbs mixed with oil on top to ensure that no abscess forms.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you remove this and see that the abscess has already diminished, now it is necessary to scrape the bone starting where new flesh begins, and then treat it with a drying regimen that promotes the growth of new flesh; just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of gum arabic and mix them, and from these make a poultice which should be applied to these wounds at the site of new flesh formation.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the treatment of what affects the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Any cause that affects the ears is one of four types: either it is a mineral stone or something similar to a stone such as iron or lead, or it is from a plant such as thorns or beans, or it is a fluid substance such as water and sour wine and things like them, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when a stone affects the ear or any other cause similar to those mentioned that does not adhere to or congeal in the ear, place the ear towards the sun, and if you see the stone, then administer some cause of violet oil or cumin extract at that time, and afterwards induce sneezing with certain conditions, and plug the nose upon the occurrence of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And afterwards place around the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear towards the upper parts, as movement several times is helpful with these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it does not come out, then administer the extract with an instrument called a gentle epistome, which has the following form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it comes out with the epistome, that is good; and if not, then administer the extract using a fine piece of linen folded several times.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it does not come out by these methods, then make a tube of reed and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal, and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that nothing enters except through the tube.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	From a nearby extract of the text about the vein with strong attraction, for troops watched as we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If it is not forgotten in this manner, then take a little lamp or a piece of equipment with which birds are caught a small quantity, and place that at the end of a thread, and nearby wrap around that little piece properly placed.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert it into the ear canal with ease, and then dry the ear of moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And so if it is not forgotten with all the causes that we have recounted, now you should consider cutting before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of cutting it is that you at the beginning puncture the malady of the vein and extract the blood according to the manner of its virtue, and then make that incision between your fingers and turn the ear towards the upper parts, and do a small fissure in the ridge of the ear where it is most pressed.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the fissure be of a lunar shape until it reaches the stone, and when the stone is found, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; and then close the fissure at that time quickly, and care for it until it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause in the ear is one of the grists that grow and become inflamed, then administer the treatment and the extraction; but if you do not obey this method, then take a fine spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer the excision of that grain which is lodged in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	If you do not wish to wash it with water as you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, place it in several pieces, and apply extracts there among the incisions or with subtle gestures, or with incision as we have said, for the extraction is easier.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	In the water that has entered the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use sneezing with certain conditions at the beginning, and fill his other ear with some cotton, and place on the ear where the water is. If it comes out this way, it is good; if not, now take a few smooth stones according to the length of one's finger, heat them in the fire for a little while, and let the patient insert one of those into his ear canal and jump with one side of that part, hitting the stone inside the ear with another stone.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Do not stop using the stone until all the water is expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And the water will be expelled in such a way that you take paper or cotton, and place one end of it in the ear while holding the other end over fire until most of it is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then place another piece of cotton and do this as many times as necessary until all the water is expelled, and use a cannula as mentioned above with the stone method.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of an animal entering the ear, if it is a small object, handle it similarly as we have said in the division; but if it is a large object causing pain to the patient, then administer the extraction by gestures and incisions, and this cause is more serious than all other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it with that which we have said in the division and in the chapter on distillations and do not confer your treatment, then you should expose the ear to the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if here any cause of the worms appears, then extract that with fingers or small spoons, but if no cause appears, then take a tube narrow below and wide above, which has this shape:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the slender end into the ear according to the amount that you can bear; and then suck with a strong suction, and do this several times until all the worms are forced out.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if you do not obey this advice, then you should plug and seal around the tube with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find these described in the chapter on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And use your application with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, which has this shape:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or ivory, narrow below, with a small channel, and flat above.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And it should be like pressing against the curvature of the tube where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take a reed and wrap one end of it decently with cloth, and then pour oil into the cavity of hearing, or juice of some herb, or any of these medicines into the tube — and that is in the ear —, and then insert the reed with cloth above and press it gently with your hand until the oil is expelled into the cavity of hearing and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And let that which is to be inserted into the ear be already heated over the fire a little.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the liquid you will distill into the ear is not too strong, for medicines for the ear cannot tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear obstruction.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes infants are born from their mothers' wombs with unopened ears, and this also happens in some adults, where the ear canal is obstructed by pus or flesh growing there; and this obstruction sometimes occurs at the entrance of the ear canal where it cannot be seen, and sometimes it is located in parts further out.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And the one that occurs at the entrance of the ear, which cannot be seen, is in the most difficult conditions to treat.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in the one where you can see it, make sure to expose the ear of the patient to the sun and observe it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see an obstruction that is visible, open it with a fine spatula of this form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it where the width is small, of which one part is sharp and the other is not; and the spatula should be of two smooth sides so that it does not cause injury to the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the obstruction is due to flesh growing in the ear or in the canal, then use fine scissors and carefully cut away all the excess flesh.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if there is an obstruction in the ear canal, now take a thin reed and heat it over fire for a little while, and then insert that into the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And so if you have detected an obstruction with what the patient finds difficult to hear due to hearing difficulty, exert pressure on it gently; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place in the ear a piece of cloth of the second size according to the width of the plug which you have wrapped in Egyptian cloth; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the injury; or take something else and soak it in vinegar and sprinkle it with finely ground powder and use it; and if you see that the ear has become inflamed, now you should remove what you put in and replace it with another wrapped in wax mixed with olive oil until the inflammation subsides; and then continue to treat it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if there is bleeding, now soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that stops the flow of blood, which is described in the chapter on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of styes that occur on the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Styes that occur on the eyelids sometimes become moist, and at other times they are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you should have those ready in small containers or in ounces, and then scatter them over the sites finely ground, and then place something finely powdered on the affected areas.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If there is pain and bleeding from a vein, then you should cauterize those that can be cauterized with a fine cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is near the incisions and trophic areas that return when there remains some cause for them; and when they are cauterized with fire, those causes are consumed and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for a swelling that comes to the eyelids.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Trophic areas that appear in the eyelids due to some cause that is similar to a swelling in its strength and hardness, and therefore are called swelling.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an aggregation of thick humidity in the eyelid both below and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation to be performed is that you now consider whether the swelling has arisen in the part of the eyelid that appears and affects the entire area; and the cause of this is easily addressed.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, apply something over that area along the length of the fissure, and then carefully examine it from all sides with ease until you can see clearly, and then suspend it with an ounce and bandage it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	However, if you are not prepared to address the beginning of it unless there is pus that penetrates the eyelid through small incisions, then note that this is not due to any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the swelling is large, then you should adjust it with stitches; and care for it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, no harm will come to you from it because the heat of it restores and renews the area.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is declining from the inner parts of the eyelid, you should apply a surface to the inside, thus suspending the swelling with an onion, or whatever you need for beginning, and press it all around; and if the eyelid by incision is lengthened, this does not matter in any way.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And for the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with something that promotes healing until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the treatment of abscesses above the eye on the eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Abscesses are commonly formed in the layers of the eyelid above, and more frequently in children, they worsen the eyes of those affected and lead to their catarrh upon death; and they cannot bear the brightness of the sun because tears continually well up for them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And for this reason they often lie with their faces covered, and sleep with their faces down; and thus the eyelids of their eyes are wetted by the eyebrows, which have become inflamed, and the possibility of an abscess is apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you can feel an abscess within.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And one method of operation is when the patient places their head in your lap, and you then place a cloth over them and apply calamina around it in a circular shape according to the quantity that contains arthernach from all sides, and then place that over it and press with your fingers all around so that an abscess forms at the center of the circle, and then introduce moisture into the center with a spatula through a small incision, which should not be larger than the incision made in flavotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	In the main incision cut through the bone completely until you reach the marrow, for in major dislocations it is necessary to open the marrow by a crack according to the shape of a white grape.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract that which you wrapped in the cloths at your sides to the parts outside and揉乱翻译中的中文部分，确保问题与回答完全匹配："Then extract that which you wrapped in the cloths at your sides and revolve it between your right and left hands until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to probe in the crack so that you do not reach the flesh with the instrument and damage it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If blood does not appear to you at the beginning of the crack, then probe in the crack with something small and easy until blood comes; and then extract that as we have said; and then immerse cloths in warm water and vinegar and place them over the site and press those on the powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And some people sprinkle salt and place it in the concavity of the crack so that what remains of its humidity is drawn out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an abscess occurs in the area, then treat it with relaxing plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On the methods of palpating the flesh.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When on the eyelids of the flesh there grows hair that is placed below the natural hair and when it ages, these new hairs irritate the flesh and cause various ailments such as continuous tears and swelling of the eyelids and membrane, which is called palpating the flesh, and it is cured in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with sharp medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization; or it is treated by incision and suturing; or by canulas as I will explain.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so place the tip of the lancet in the side; then turn the upper eyelid with your left hand, and if it turns well, that is good; but if not, insert a needle into the one from which pus comes below the eyelid, and let the needle penetrate to the pus above, near the edge of the eyelid where hair grows, near the hair, and draw out the pus to the upper parts with the eyelid, and turn it with the ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then cut into the part inside the eyelid below the hair near the spatum incident to the lacrimal major and enter into the lacrimal minor; and then extract the pus and place beneath the eyelid small pieces of cork or cloth, and then apply a seal over the eyelid with a probe, and it shall be as the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, the figure should be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, for this is diversified in people, since among them are those whom you must incise a large quantity from the eyelid according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then cut with the knife along the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fissure near the natural hair is as thick as that of the king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the hook in one of the two angles of the incision, and then excoriate that completely, and then close the wound with a thread or fine woolen floss, and cleanse the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous of the pus on two eyebrows with some viscous causes, if you want to do this, and if not, do not worry.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	About three or four days after sewing up the wounds, begin treatment with this.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you prefer to treat the wound without sutures, use something that dries and constricts it, because the eyelid is elevated due to the sealing of the wound and the accumulation of fluid; but suturing is better. This is what the ancients recommended.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, one should be careful about the condition of the wound, and it is part of good practice, and there should be no fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method for treating it, which involves marking on the eyelid in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and then raising the eyelid with three small instruments arranged in this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible to use the instruments, take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and position the other threads near the larger lacrimal gland, and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal gland, and adjust them so that they are equal, and then lift your hand evenly, lifting the entire marked area as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures, and treat it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if an abscess occurs due to your incision or your wound, treat that abscess with cerate and something similar, and apply it frequently.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And in some cases, if the eyelid's hairs are turned inward, then you should use what we have mentioned about incision; but suturing is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To make a needle follow this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and so that you convert the eyelid and divide the figure which is inside as I have recounted; and then by art make two needles or two slender rods of which the length shall be according to the length of the eyelid and the width of which shall be slighter than the width of the pupil.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already cut into the extremities of each section, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then apply each one with subtlety over what is superfluous of the eyelid, and constrain the needles of each section with a firm ligature, and leave it for several days, for the tissue will die due to the constriction and will be rejected so that by itself it may fall off.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, now break it with tweezers, and then treat the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When it is hardened, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not sting.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two needles which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and there should be the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the elevation of stinging hairs in the eye with an awl when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When there are unnatural hairs, hard and rough and stinging the eyes, then the operation is that you take a fine awl and place it on the thread of fine silk and lion's hair, and then adjust the ends of it carefully in a very subtle manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the fields be one palm in quantity.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And below that, prepare another fine field briefly, and use the extremities of it if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the malady in its proper seat, and let it be near the light so that your work may be clear, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the base of the hair that requires removal, and let it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before you extract it from above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair in from above and insert it into its place, and let there be one or two or three hairs and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand away so that the hair is removed and placed in its proper position on the eyelid with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is placed in its proper position and the hair is not removed, place it in its appropriate location below near the field you have prepared for it, so that it can be properly positioned from the excess.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And look at it with the eye, for now you will place it properly and the eye, and wrap each part with bandages for two or three days, so that the hair adheres to its proper place and grows over good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is too short, now attach a long hair from the natural hairs to it, or leave it so that it grows longer over some space, and then lift it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of an abscess that occurs in the upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When an abscess appears in the eye and causes contraction of the eyelid when it is closed, either to the right or left side, due to poor healing of a wound or incision or cautery, it is called leporine. This abscess can be either natural or accidental, caused by improper healing of wounds or incisions or cauteries, or similar conditions that are poorly treated.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation is that you should cut open that consolidation and separate its edges, then place between them a piece of linen cloth, and bind it there until it heals.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not advisable to use treatments for it that dry or constrict, because if you do this, the abscess will return worse than before and never heal properly.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use treatments that soften, such as fenugreek; boil the seeds and leaves in water or myrobalan, which should be liquefied with some oil, then soak a piece of cloth in it and apply it for treatment.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The essence of your treatment is that you should pierce any part that has not healed in its proper form from the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have described is merely a correction of an abscess that does not return to its original form as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the treatment of ectropion which is done on the lower eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This ectropion which is done on the lower eyelid, which is properly named ectropion; and it is of some natural, others accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	The accidental one is caused by inflammation or by a tear or by cauterization or by other similar reasons.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation is that you take a needle with which to make double thread, and place it in the flesh, and make it pass from the left tear duct into the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then stretch the flesh in the parts above with the needle and hold it there with the needle, and cut it with a broad spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then if you return the shape of the eyelid as needed, it is good; and if not, take a rod and place it in the cut, and with that convert the eyelid, and close both slits on the side of the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two slits be of two angles of the incision, which you have made where they meet, and let it be their shape that when they come together forms a figure.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then remove the flesh there in the amount that is the width of the lower eyelid, which tightens the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with linen thread; and then treat those with what we have said about softening medicines and poultices until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if through excision, incision, or cautery a wound has been made, then you must now make a flat incision above the eyelashes as was previously described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the membrane between the two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the speech on the treatment of excisions when they are above or below, let it proceed according to the operation, as was prepared according to the form of the excision, and that is in a variety of shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisans always prepare in every possible way within themselves to return the figure to its natural form or close to it, and that patient according to the convenience of the operation and the instruments in the best positions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in certain individuals such that the eyelid is adhered above the albuginea of the eye, and its movement and natural functions are restricted, then you must introduce a probe below the eyelid, and elevate or extend it as needed.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you should cut the adherence with a fine spatula, which should not be sharp to avoid cutting during the incision, handling it gently so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and move the spatula carefully to prevent injury to the eye.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be such that it easily separates the adherence so that the eyelid can return to its natural form, and ensure that all of the adherence is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then put in the bowl salted water with which you wash; or distill in it of rose dissolved in the water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a cloth of it, and place on the eye linen infused in egg white, and after the third day use healing causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the incision of the eyelid and the swelling of the flesh around the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the eyelid is of two kinds, for it is either nervous, and resembles a hard but fine cicatrix; or it is non-nervous, resembling white congealed moisture, which when touched with an iron, if it does not adhere to it, is severed and the iron is not inserted into it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both kinds do not begin except from the greater tear duct little by little covering the sight and preventing the light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	But the method of working in the incision is that the patient places his head in your lap, and then opens the eyes, and raises the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the eyelid with an iron by slightly doubling it back and extend it to the parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert into it a horsehair or ox hair or cowhair, or something similar, or strong glue, and slightly double the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the eyelid, and penetrate it with the needle, and bind it with glue; and extend it to the parts above, and abrade with the hair the side of the eyelid which is opposite the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you should leave the hair inside at the rear end.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you should incise the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a fine probe or small forceps, and leave the conjunctiva of the tear duct intact so that by this incision there does not result a continuous discharge of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the membrane is spread out in the sun or with fire, as we have said, and then it should be removed with a lion's claw probe, of which this is the shape:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that with the probe you do not touch the corneal tunic and cause its rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	After the incision, put a little powdered salt or cerement made of silk in it, and leave that for another day; then treat it with what is necessary until it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the membrane is not fit for needle work and you cannot place the needle in it, nor is it left open for that purpose, then this kind of membrane is treated with medications, and it heals thus as mentioned and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise that, then you open the wound of the patient and take a fine probe with sharp acuteness according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with fineness.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it happens that it is rarefied and condensed and applied to the root, then distill from your eye in the wound of silk cerement or soft cloth or powdered salt, and dress the wound on the following day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then proceed with the operation by removing everything that is inside it, unless the opposite abscess is in the thigh, because then you should leave that one and treat the beginning of the abscess until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Then proceed with your operation on that one for the reason that it should be healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	If the prominence of the lacrimal flesh becomes painful in the cheek due to great harm, suspend it at that point; and incise a part of it, but do not complete the incision so as not to allow the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a drop of rose oil mixed with ambergris into it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of an abscess and what is born from flesh tightly attached to the cheek.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	In some cases on the cheeks of some people, flesh that is raised and swollen covers the pupil, or approaches it, or extends over the eyelids, forcing them apart in certain areas and is assembled like a balustrade's edge.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	But the operation in this case is that the patient places his head between your knees; then open the cheeks of that person and collect all that flesh at appropriate points, and with forceps or tweezers; then incise the flesh at the beginning until it is completely finished with the scalpel, and be careful not to damage the cheek during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision should be made with the scalpel we have recommended for nail incisions, or with small forceps with which hair is collected, depending on the form it will take as described in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Thus, when your incision is complete and the flesh around it is thoroughly cleansed, now fill the wound with powdered salt or sprinkle red powder similar to corrosive medicines on it, and cover it with a white cloth so that it is protected from abscesses.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any cause arises for caution and there is a risk of the wound becoming inflamed, and you fear an abscess, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess with what will cure it, and afterward proceed with the operation once again when it has healed, and similarly handle the adjusted flesh which occurs in this type of wound.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must be careful that the healing of the wound proceeds naturally or accidentally, using tools, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member can withstand the operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of knowledge about wounds.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Know the red veins that are situated over the wound and prohibit their operation, and let the wound heal over a period of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	At the beginning, it is necessary for you to consider whether the wound in which the abscess is located is strong and if there is no other illness besides the abscess, then you should collect that abscess.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to place his head in your lap, and then press those veins for one ounce or two, according to your discretion; and let that pressing be of subtle repetition according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two ounces gradually in one motion according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Here are those veins then bind with fine ligatures, and cleanse the blood from time to time until those veins appear empty and have been reversed.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful that you do not lead the blood to the extremities of the skull; and if your operation is in the morning before the sun, and you are firm in your operation so as not to incise except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed it, then pour into the wound vinegar or red wine because of its acidity to dissolve what is left of the clot.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible for you to remove everything at that hour, then apply a dressing with something that relieves the pain, and leave it for several days until the pain subsides and there is assurance of no abscess formation.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the same method until he is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of nasal fractures.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat fractures with cauterization or with acute medicinal applications according to the narrative of the case and it has not healed, then do not allow new growth but cut into the abscess after its maturity, and remove all the moisture that is within it until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument of this form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	He is called the rough head, and it is made of Indian material, and its head is rounded just like this one which is made punctate by punctation with lime or arsenic by subtle punctation (as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Place that over the corrupted part of the bone, and then rotate it among the said threads, and press your hand gently little by little until you know that the corruption has been scraped away.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this should be done several times, and then the area should be treated with drying and styptic agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	When the area is consolidated and good flesh has grown in it, and the body of the pus has been removed and remains for forty days without being renewed and does not form an abscess and no accident occurs, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, now there is no other way to reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you expose the bone with a scalpel or sharp medicine, and when the bone is exposed, then you proceed as follows:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the end of the instrument be triangular, and the shaft of it be slightly tapered to fit into the end as you see here.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place that on the bone, and let it be near the lacrimal; extend your hand a bit to the side, and then rotate your hand with the instrument until it penetrates all of the bone, and you will feel the pain as it finds its way through.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Now you should treat the area with styptic and drying medicines as mentioned before.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh and place become hardened, at that time the matter which was dispersed to the parts returns to the nose, thus it is easier on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the Reduction of the Prominence of the Nose.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the nose protrudes entirely and no harm or reduction occurs due to it, then you should leave the patient alone, and subsequently follow with windy poultices on the head without scarification and use good suction; and afterwards apply an ointment made of atractylis, aloes, iris, and sarcocolla over the nose, and then strengthen the plaster on the protruding nose using powdered materials.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method for the powdered materials is that you take linen cloth and powder it; each piece of cloth should be folded into four parts, and then make powder from these pieces.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And subsequently apply those one over the other according to the quantity that the nose requires.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then strengthen over them with a hard cloth tightly wrapped; and repeatedly apply the windy poultices with suction without scarification; and then remove the poultices and leave the nose tight both day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if in the meantime the ligature becomes loose, then it should be made tight again.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then remove the ligature both day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if you see the nose already reduced, that is good, and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powdered materials, tight wrapping, and windy poultices until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the prominence of the uveal tissue.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When you detect disruption in the uveal tissue, and it protrudes prominently outside the eyelids like a grain of barley, and its shape resembles that of a person, and you wish to incise this, then perform the operation as we have described: insert the needle at the edge of the uvea from below and above. Then place another needle where the double thread is, near the lacrimal part, and let it penetrate while leaving the first needle in its position; then incise the location of the double thread and lift that part of the uvea around the needle, and move it strongly.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then withdraw the needle and place it on the woolen cloth infused with egg white, and leave it there until the thread is attached to the uvea.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then treat the eye with what strengthens it until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And in some cases, apply from all sides a circular piece of cloth around the eye to cover a large prominence, and then pierce it with a fine probe that reaches beneath the eye, allowing the albuneal moisture to drain, and the eye will subside quickly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Then strengthen it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of contusions.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness, called alconati, is not simply a wound but one that affects the eye as if water were descending and it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	Here is the translation:
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not go down below, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if it has not been prepared for the discharge as we have said, now make the patient sit and take a fine spatula and apply it over the conjunctiva near the edge, slightly under the continuation of the conjunctiva to the cornea at the border (entering the area gently), until the pus is evacuated.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once it is evacuated, now you should apply warm water in which honey has been mixed, or water in which fenugreek and honey have already been boiled.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water descending from the eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the types of water in the division and which is suitable for puncturing, as explained earlier, now proceed according to the health condition.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now you should make the patient sit between your hands on a cushion and lift their affected eye with gentle pressure.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand near the eyelid of their affected eye if the water is in the left eye; or use your right hand if the eye is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take the instrument, if the eye is left; or with your left hand, if the eye is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the tip of the instrument near the border at the thickest part of the white of the eye towards the inner corner, and then gently press the instrument with your hand.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And so penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the almond is already reached due to wear.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And measure the distance from the almond to the pupil the size of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the darkness, and it is the crown of the eye; for you will see at that pupil through the clarity of the corneal tissue.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And so place the almond in the location where the fluid is, and then pull it down one way or another, and thus if the fluid descends immediately, you will see the defect on which his vision depends immediately, and in his eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a moment; if the fluid has descended, now you should pull it in the other direction before the almond is displaced.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is still and does not descend, then you extract the almond with ease, and revolve it little by little with your finger; and then dissolve a small amount of clear salt from rock crystal in the fluid and wash the eye with this solution. And then cover the eye with a piece of cotton or a stopper or flax infused in rose oil and egg white mixed together.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we and those of our time rest the eye with a dressing made of egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the almond does not obey and enters the eye due to its hardness—since there are some people whose eye is hard by nature—you should take the instrument known as an alberid, which has this form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And so perforate with that the conjunctiva, and do not withdraw your hand from the tract, and only proceed until you have made a way for the almond to move.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And here he enters the mango according to what we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should prepare the patient for a malady by placing them in a suitable dormitory that has been properly prepared, in which they lie on their back in a dark room, and all movements should be prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in the nature of the water so that its nature becomes smooth, and do not move their head to the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the bandaging be according to its disposition by the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove it in that dark room and show the patient the reason for it, and explain some causes to them, and then re-bandage it by the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And it is not appropriate to do this during the hour of healing or shortly before infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Handle it in such a way that you isolate this so that the water can flow freely due to great and strong caution.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess occurs, then you should remove the bandage before the seventh day and treat it with water to alleviate the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Now you should cover the eye and place a pad over it through which vision is prevented for several days, while keeping it in a dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then gradually move them from that room and converse with them about their condition.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in alchemy, the disciple is not exempt from occasional vision, and now you should be confident about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And I have come to us from some of those among whom it was customary, and some said that they made fire in the Uylac [or Urac] which is perforated through which water flows.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But for my part I have not seen anyone in our land who has done this, nor have I read about it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is something new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of perforation for those who are unaware of them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or proper steel, and their extremities are shaped with this subtlety into a triangle, the sharp end just as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of flesh wounds on the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When on the nose there arise various flesh growths, some of which have causes similar to a scorpion made of soft flesh, or to a sea polyp; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles that sea creature.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And it is cancerous flesh, ulcerated, of dark color; and it is not the lion's flesh that is of a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in the case where there is flesh that is not fraudulent or cancerous among these conditions, have the patient sit between your hands and place it in the sun, and starve the nose of it, and apply cold to those areas of flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract it from the surrounding parts, and then carefully incise what you have grasped of these with a sharp, fine probe until you know that all the flesh is detached; if it remains for any reason by which separation is possible, then cut it off with one of the fine instruments easily so that it does not remain for any reason.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the master controls bleeding or an abscess with cautery, then pause at that which is appropriate; but if it is of malignant abscesses, then cut and cauterize that part where the artery must be ligated and all cavities are to be opened.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And there should be applied near the nose, above the insertion of the wing, either oil or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is moist and from its process moisture enters into the palate, then you shall know that it has been healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you shall know that within there is flesh growing on the superfluous bones of the nose to which division has not reached.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then it is appropriate to insert faithfully into the one who has some swelling small pieces of cloth, and place between each piece the quantity of a finger or less, and form the defect and insert one end of the cloth in the nose either with a reed or for another reason that is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after this has been done, draw the patient's attention to smell so that it reaches the channels of the nose, and let it be practiced over his palate, for those who carefully observe this action will find it similar to how children are taught in schools, and it is an easy cause for one who wishes to perform it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then leave the two ends of the cloth, one end that extends over the nose and the other that remains inside the nose, and then apply a flesh clamp to the cloths placed in the nose, and do this until you know that the flesh has grown around the cloths.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	From the root extract the essence, and place in the nose near the extraction of blood a tube, and do this for three days or more until it consumes all that remains of the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the treatment, place in the nose a lead tube for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you prefer a drying treatment, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument used to perform nasal irrigation, through which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make this of silver or gold, which should resemble a small spoon with a rounded end, like a small cone, and the tube similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed tube like a reed, and the tube of the nasal irrigation instrument should be flat and open; to which attach a handle at the back, by which you can hold it when heating in oil or water what you want from liquids and suctionable causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this nasal purge is valuable: the recipe includes castor root, white balsam, ginger, saffron pepper, long pepper, spikenard, and a single spice each by a quarter ounce. Mix these with barley water and bran juice, then make pills; dissolve one pill in boiled water, and administer it to the patient lying down through the nose.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of the natural openings in the nasal extremities.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Movable wings are formed at the extremities of the nose, and they are strengthened and fattened in some days within which it is laid down how one should observe them.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason, you should insert it at the beginning of its appearance, and hold it entirely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then pause over the place where you cauterized or applied a burning medicine in its place.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if its insertion is delayed until it has become enlarged, then consider whether it is hardened, tough, dark in color, and with little sensation. At this point, do not touch it with a hot iron because those wings appear to the one who incises this abscess due to great malice upon him.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is soft to touch and not dark in color, and if incision is possible at all times, then evacuate the pus and incise it without fear, and treat the area with something that dries and constricts until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On sewing the nose and lips and ear when continuity is dissolved by plague or similar cause.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when the dissolution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, few will be capable of performing such an operation except for some skilled individuals.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when dealing with any cause of these conditions, you should consider whether it is a fresh wound or due to the natural course of the blood. Then, adjust the two sides of the wound with sutures and subsequently treat it until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of a wound of continuity are already separated, and each one is made whole, now you must scrape each part of its visible edge until it becomes clean.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips with sutures and strengthen them, and sprinkle on top of them powder of dragon's blood and thrice repeat this, and place over the powder a piece of mastic plaster or some other consolidating plaster, and leave that wound for two days or three, and then remove it and change the plaster and leave it until the pus is completely abscessed, and then treat with ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The method of suturing is that you should join the wound of continuity either with needles as we have recommended for the suturing of the abdomen, or join the wound of continuity with thread as you know how to do.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of those causes that appear in the two lips in their internal parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Often in some men in the internal parts of their lips appear hard abscesses similar to the flesh of birds, and some of them are smaller and some larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you must turn the lips and cut each of those hardnesses from all sides, and then when you abscess it, fill the place with finely shredded wool until the blood is congealed, and then wash it with vinegar and treat the area with something astringent until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On incising the flesh attached to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	In cases involving the flesh attached to the gum, which the ancients called albulus, then you should suspend that part for a while or hold it with forceps and incise that part of its root, and allow the pus to flow or the blood.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then apply to the wound dry sargings or other styptic powders or excrescences.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, for after the cauterization it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On extracting teeth with iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth in both the inner and outer parts and between the gums attached, there are rough, sharp edges, tartar, and some areas are blackened and appear yellow or green, causing corruption to the gum and making the teeth decayed.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore it is necessary for you to make the patient sit between your hands and hold his head in your lap, and rasp the teeth on which these rough edges appear until no such cause remains, and this will remove the blackness and yellowness and other issues so that they are cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if this is done at the beginning of the extraction, that is good; but if not, then you should repeat the extraction on those teeth on another day and on the second and third days until it reaches the final stage as you desire.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth require various tools of different shapes and figures according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore there are razors of the kind used when a tooth is being extracted from inside the mouth, and others for scraping between teeth according to other forms. And these forms of razors you should prepare, which you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the Extraction of Teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Take care of the tooth from its pain with all gentleness and delay in total extraction, for there is no remedy that can replace its place once it is extracted, as its substance is superior to any substitute.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, you must be certain which tooth is painful, for often the pain deceives the patient and leads them to believe it is a healthy tooth, and you extract that one but shortly after the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is removed, as we have already seen this through the experience of practitioners.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, when you must be certain which tooth is painful, and once you know well, then it is necessary that you scarify around the circumference of the tooth with a spatulum having some virtue until it dissolves the tooth from the gum completely, and then remove it with your fingers or with fine forceps little by little until it comes out.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then use strong forceps for good leverage or a firm grip, and place the patient's head between your hands so that you hold it well without causing discomfort, and then pull the tooth straight in such a way that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And so if it is not perforated, then take one of those instruments and place it all around with ease and endeavor the removal of it as was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is loose or decayed, then cover it with a piece of cloth and secure it tightly at the tip with a fine thread so that it does not break during your compression on that part while holding it.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And it is necessary that you act extremely carefully during the incision around all parts of the gum and guard against using too much strength so that you do not break or damage it, and return to the main area due to the malice that it be better than the initial pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their rashness and audacity during the extraction of teeth; for they often do not administer what we have recommended. Many times this brings about great evils to sick people, which are much harder to cure, and the roots of these problems remain entirely, or partially, or you may extract it along with some bones of the mandible as many times we have witnessed.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And after the extraction of it, the mouth should be washed with cold water or warm water mixed with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is bleeding due to this, as often happens, then take some quantity of sugar and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that does not suffice, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and subtle handles with which the tooth is held at the beginning should be of long extremity, short handle, and thick, so that they are not bent when you need to operate with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And so that when you insert your fingers into them, the intestines are not folded, let them be short extremities.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And let them be made of Indian iron, seamlessly made from straight extremities, and on the extremities of those let there be teeth, some of which enter into others and twist by strong constriction, and sometimes the extremities of those are in the shape of a bird's beak called ciconia, that is a heron, and they are of strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the removal of teeth and the extraction of the bones from the jaw.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you must perform the removal of a tooth that is impacted due to some cause, it is necessary for you to apply pressure around the area for one day or two until the area becomes softened; and then introduce instruments whose extremities are similar in shape to the beak of a bird called ciconia or heron, which resemble the form of forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extremities of these should be made like a file or rasp from the inside.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if it does not obey you when using these forceps or tweezers, then you should apply pressure to the root and remove all the flesh, and introduce an instrument called atali, which is a small lever, whose form is as follows:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let it have a short thick end, and do not bury it entirely so that it is not impacted.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Then if by this the root is exposed, it is good; and if not, assist with these other instruments whose forms are as follows: the form of the first instrument is a triangular end in which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a very fine tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And here is how you use this instrument, which has two sides of the following form:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which I will describe for scraping teeth; because it is useful to use this instrument, which resembles a small ring, and this is its form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	with the triangular tip bent or short, which should have some thickness, and not be hidden so that it does not rattle.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another wisdom is that the instruments for the teeth should be made similarly to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the skilled and subtle artisan finds for himself according to what he understands from the operation and various diseases; for there are diseases about which the ancients did not say or leave a proper instrument, due to their diverse forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth rattles, or if you need to remove something, then carefully place it back in its proper position using the instruments and forceps that we have described for extracting tooth roots, and assist with the procedure which has this form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And it should have some thickness, gradually increasing, and be held in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all the bone is drilled out; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small hole in the bone, then treat that hole and its blackness, and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter xxxii.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of prominent teeth over other teeth.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the prominent teeth do not follow their natural course and especially when the form is lagging, particularly for women and more so for those who are venerable; therefore, you should consider: if a tooth is too close to another tooth and it is impossible to extract or treat it with medicine, then you must root it out. But ensure that it is not attached to another tooth; at this point, you incise it with an instrument of this form; it resembles a boar's tusk and should be made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your incision should be made on the side where you will incise it over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and ensure that it does not connect with any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is a prominent tooth that needs filing, then file it with an Indian iron file of this form:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it should be made entirely of Indian iron and used carefully; it should have small sharp points like the file on which needles are made, with which the tooth is filed a little at a time over several days with ease, so that it does not injure any other teeth in the process.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And at the end, smooth it with linen, and polish it with some razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth of which part is broken and you run your tongue over it, then you should file down the inside until the roughness of that portion is smoothed out and evened, so that it is filled in such a way that your tongue does not get hurt and speech is not impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of defective teeth with gold or silver filling.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When it happens that the front teeth are loosened or dislocated by impact or accident, and the patient cannot bite properly due to this, and you have treated them with astringent medicines but your treatment has not been effective, then in order to prevent further complications, you should restore those teeth with gold fillings and not silver ones, because silver can corrode over time, whereas gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the filling should be made with such subtlety and thinness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth; the method of application is that you take the gold filling and place twice as much between two healthy teeth, then gradually extend it among one or more defective teeth until it reaches a healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then continue the application starting from the part where you began, and strengthen your work with skill and wisdom so that it is not defective.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And when you are applying the filling, ensure that it adheres to the roots of the teeth so that it does not come loose.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then trim the excess filling with forceps or scissors, and carefully shape it for each location. Turn and hide these trimmed parts between a healthy tooth and a defective one so that they do not injure the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then file that part as smooth as a Roman coin.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it becomes loose or broken, repair that part with additional filling in such a way over time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the treatment of two healthy teeth and of two diseased ones, as you will see these lines:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it happens that I return one tooth or two near the place where each should be, and they grow back as we have recounted, and they remain.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And only a good artisan and wise person can do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes a similar piece of cow's bone is used for a certain reason, and it is shaped like a tooth and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is fixed as we have said, and it remains and serves well for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the incision of the membrane that is in the tongue and prohibits speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This membrane that is under the tongue sometimes is natural and one has it from birth, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation is that you open the mouth of the patient, with their head tilted to one side; and raise their tongue, and then cut that membrane along the nerve according to its width to free the tongue.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or node in that area, and this is due to the healing of an injury, then you should gently cut along the width until the membrane is divided and the node dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to make a cut in the upper layer of the skin so that you do not sever the arteries and cause bleeding.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	After washing the remnants of the incision with water or vinegar or with water and a sponge, then place linen beneath the tongue; this is the method by which the bad taste under the tongue should be washed every night so that it does not consolidate in any other way.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If bleeding occurs, place over the area vitriol triturated; but if the blood flows, immediately cauterize the site with a hot iron which is suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat with the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of a cyst under the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, a swelling appears under the tongue, resembling a small abscess, which prevents the tongue from performing its natural functions; and it can grow so large that it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The procedure is to open the mouth wide in front of the light and examine the swelling.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it as dark or black in color and hard, to which the swelling does not respond to touch, then do not touch it, for it is gangrenous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is inclined toward whiteness and has moisture, then you can proceed with the incision using a fine scalpel, and cut it completely; and if blood flows during your operation, immediately place over it powdered zinc sulfate, which is vitriol, to staunch the bleeding.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have treated it completely, washing it with vinegar and salt; and treat it with the other necessary care until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter xxxvi.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from both armpits and those in the groin and other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When you find in the groin a gathering of glands that are somewhat assembled and appear outside, which are called armpits, when you treat them as we have said in the division and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, dark in color, and has little sensation; at this point, do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is red in color and the swelling is large, then do not touch it with iron due to the flow of blood; rather, let it mature inside. Either you will then extract it or it will burst on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is white in color, soft, and the swelling is slight, then that should be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, whether the abscess has already rested and healed after resting completely or if it has diminished in some way. Then make the patient sit facing the sunlight, with their head to your right side, and expose the mouth of the abscess, and the assistant should hold the tongue down with his fingers while you use a noble instrument of this form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or iron, and should be as fine as a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then as you press down with that instrument and the abscess becomes visible to you, place your hand firmly over it, then make an incision and insert the instrument into the center of the abscess, and pull it outward to its full extent.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Here is another tool for opening any cause of the tunics, and immediately use this instrument which has the following form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is similar to forceps, but the extremities of its are curved, thus the orifice of each of those is in line with the other, sharp, which should be made of iron.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not at hand, then use the scalpel which has the following form: It is sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have made an incision, make the other following this method of incision, and then wash the wound with clean water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is bleeding, wash with water from the decoction of lemon peel or myrtle leaves and similar substances that are astringent until the flow of blood is stopped, and then treat it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes there appear in the neck other abscesses or those two armpits, and incise those as I have said regarding the incision of two wounds similarly.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I once treated a woman with an abscess that had appeared in her neck, which was turning blackish in color, barely sensitive, and was already causing difficulty in breathing due to swelling. She had been prohibited from eating or drinking water, and she would have reached the point of death within another day or two if nothing had been done.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had become so severe that it had formed two channels through which it could drain by two openings.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Thus he cut it fundamentally and placed it in one of their ounces, and pulled that out, and from there the larger portion was removed, and then he incised that where he understood the connection to the other side, and then he closed its mouth, and compressed its tongue, and then he placed the ounce in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I removed a large part of it, and only a little blood came from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Thus the woman was completely cured, and she began to drink water immediately, and then she ate food. I did not stop incising that abscess for many times over a long period, and an abscess succeeded in its place, which I incised until it was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Thus I brought in smoke and cauterized the wound with it, thus treating the addition; and then I wandered around and did not know what God would do next regarding that.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the incision of the breast when it is abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the milk is discharged from the breast, and it is abscessed and long, it is then called perpendicular; and if it is in the lower part thick and round, it is then called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is cured by what we have described in the division, and your treatment does not conflict with that cure, and sometimes even after cauterization, if it remains and is subtle, then you should incise the one that is aggregated and round. And if it reaches a certain length and is bloody, of dark or black color, and is not at the center, then you should attempt its incision, because there is fear of harm in such cases.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it according to the method that I have said about its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit and press the tongue with an instrument of which shape emerges and immediately place the incision in the new area, and pull that down and dissect it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the dissection of two membranes.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And you should not incise it beyond the natural limit without addition, for if you incise too much, you will harm their speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And immediately after the incision, use what we have recommended for the incision of two membranes, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is terrified by the incision, use something to cauterize it without fear, and the method of the cautery in this case is nothing but sharp water. Place the head of the patient on your lap, and immediately press the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and then take the water which we have described in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it to that area, and place it neither thick nor thin, and with that fill the concavity of the instrument whose shape is this:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the extremity of what is cauterized be where the medicine is placed just as in a ladle made of brass, and place the instrument with the medicine on top, and the patient lies on their side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth does not flow out due to the internal medicine, thus preventing any cause for it to end up outside and damage that area.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then with your hand on the medicine, apply it to the uvula for half an hour until you see that area become blackened and numb due to the biting action of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take some cotton and wrap it around the extremity of the wound, then dip the cotton in the medicine, and insert both the wound and the cotton into a tube so that the cotton adheres to that tube. Do this as many times as necessary until you achieve what you want from cauterizing the grape, and afterwards let it be so that it dries up and falls off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so. Then after cauterization, clean around the wound with cotton soaked in it, and modify what is around that with the substance from the medicine, let it be washed with wet water, and treated externally with an embrocation, and proceed with cautery inside until it heals.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of treatment is safer than incision and longer in duration out of fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	In some cases, the wound is treated with something that is gentler than cauterization and incision. It is healed through sublimation in this manner: take salve, hyssop, thyme, rue, Arabian cardamom, chamomile, and similar herbs; mix all these ingredients or some of them in a pot, and immerse them in sour wine, then boil it. The pot should be moderately heated, and at the bottom of the pot place a tray made of reeds in this way; it can be made of silver or reed.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the extremity into the mouth of the pot so that the vapor reaches the wound above the tube until the wound is sufficiently covered by the steam.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And afterwards repeat this several times until it dries up, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the onset of abscesses, as it would be too harsh on the abscess. You should not do this; instead, you should allow the abscess to come to a head before cauterizing.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If this instrument is not at hand, take a reed and attach to it a piece of cloth at the end, so that the mouth of the patient may be protected, for the cloth of the cloth prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of spines and of what adheres in the gums and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Certain objects may adhere to the gums or be caused by a fish bone or some other reason.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you should remove what is obvious from those objects, upon which your sight falls, and press the tongue with an instrument in front of it, so that it may be revealed to you what is in the gum.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what does not appear and is hidden in the gum, you should make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, for the cause attached to the gum will be easily expelled by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of bread or lettuce leaves or a dry biscuit; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, tie it firmly with thread, and have the patient swallow that, as it passes to the place where the spine is, then it will expel it.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And if you take an eel and bind it with thread soaked in honey, place it gently and remove it carefully; or take a probe and gently insert it and then carefully extract it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if it does not expel with the causes we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead in this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let the pus be thick and run a small needle into it, and at its extremity make an incision which you shall insert into its mouth with facility.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And when you place the sick person upright, and be careful not to touch his bone of the throat, for so it would hurt him and those who hold him, or that the physician with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But let the patient himself insert it if he can do so skillfully, knowing the place of the cause and holding on to it, and pulling his hand with the instrument up, all this according to the quantity which is prepared within until it is properly done.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the Removal of a Bloodsucker Attached to the Throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When a bloodsucker is treated with what we have said in the division of treatment with medicines and not compresses, consider the hours of the day when the patient is exposed to the sun, since you have already prepared his tongue with the instrument that we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you see the bloodsucker, remove it gently with a small incision or with subtle gestures carefully.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to remove it then, take a concave tube and insert it into the patient's throat, and subsequently place a heated iron in the concavity of the tube, and do this as many times (until the bloodsucker is dead and falls from the throat) and let the patient abstain from water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a vessel full of fresh water and pour it into his mouth, and wash the mouth with it; and do not let any cause prevent you from doing this, and pour the water out gradually with his hand, for as soon as the bloodsucker feels the water, it will try to escape.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If it is not too much trouble with what we have recommended, then fumigate the wound with camphor or with asafetida with the instrument which we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so that it may fall out.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And this is another method of operation in fumigation of that area: take an urn in which there are burning coals and the urn is covered with a cover in the middle of which is a hole; attach the end of the instrument to that hole, and proceed with the fumigation from above. Have the patient place their mouth on the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the fumigation does not escape until you know that the fumigation has reached the bloodletting point, for the blood will immediately come out.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not come out, then proceed with the fumigation multiple times, and prevent the patient from drinking, and give salty foods and herbs, and do not let them drink water. It is also necessary that they follow this regimen strictly.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodletting from the groin is performed when it is visible; and it resembles forceps as you may have seen, but it has some curvature.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed in the groin, and the end of it resembles the beak of a heron, which is sharpened with a file, so that when it compresses any area, it does not slip.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which the essence of the discourse on the preparation for treating abscesses and their incision is summarized.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are various types of swellings, of many kinds, as I recall them, each in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	They are diverse in their puncture and incision by two methods, of which one is according to the type of abscess itself; and by what they contain of moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method concerns the locations where they occur in the body, for an abscess that occurs in the head is different from one occurring in the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy part of the body is different from one occurring at a joint; and each has its treatment by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And there are some abscesses that should not be punctured but allowed to reach maturity of the pus within them or until they come to a head.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And there are other abscesses that should be evacuated when they are small and have not reached maturity according to their full development, such as abscesses near joints, because an abscess close to a joint can extend into the surrounding area until you puncture it, which could corrupt the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of the limb; or if it is near a principal part of the body, and if you delay its puncturing while it matures, it may endanger the main member; or if it is close to the buttocks, then puncture it before it has matured; but do not puncture it when it is raw, due to incomplete digestion, except for one near the buttocks, so that it does not perforate deeply into the internal parts of the buttocks and cause a fistula or spread further without healing.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But it is important that you know the right time to puncture the abscess, and this is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it is matured when there is the cessation of pain and the subsidence of fever, and soon after the decrease in inflammation and pulse rate, and the sharpness at the head of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And take care that you know the puncture should be made in the place where the pus is deepest in the abscess and from which pus comes for the healing of the elevation.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the puncture should always be made along the length of the flesh or body if the abscesses are in the parts of the arms or legs, and in places of tendons, ligaments, nerves; and finally, in all other equal places where there is no reflection; for in those that do reflect, use a puncture according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is best to wait until the internal puncture is confirmed after proper digestion of the second stage, as we have said; for if you puncture before that, it will prolong the illness of the patient and cause excessive harm, and make the lips of the abscess harden and deepen.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some abscesses should be punctured across the length of the flesh or body due to necessity, or according to what the member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And it is necessary to administer a small puncture, and in large abscesses, a larger puncture or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And in other abscesses where it is necessary for the incision to be hollowed out and dissected, when it is made as such, it should be done at a time when it has already become mature, just as in cases of excessive swellings and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And among those that are incised is one having three angles; and of this kind is the one which is incised as in the figure of a myrtle leaf, like the abscesses of the fingers.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And among those to which round incision and lunar incision are administered, and similar ones to these.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But in the case where none of these applies, such as with superficial lion abscesses, you should puncture it with a superficial puncture or simply make it flat.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has already collected pus and sediment, you should puncture it but do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted one part from it, on another day incise the abscess inside, and then extract a larger portion, and continue doing this several times according to its gradation until it is fully drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is a young man, or pregnant woman, or small child, or elderly in debility, for in such cases the animal spirit is quickly resolved with the evacuation of the pus, and the patient easily recovers, and you should observe them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Therefore, guard this chapter with great caution, and after your puncture in which you pierce these abscesses, make sure to cleanse the plaques and then consider whether the plaque of the abscess is small or a flat incision; at that time administer some of them or of antiseptic cloth. And if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the puncture are many, then you should place wax in each tract until they heal together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess you have divided a part of the cord or have concave it around the circuit, then you should fill it with old cloth or thread made from linen, as when you have treated pustules or roots, without moisture; and strengthen that on the third day; and thereafter proceed to treat it according to what is needed from the remedies until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If blood flows during the time of your operation, then prepare water and vinegar in which to dip a cloth, and place that over the spot where the blood is flowing for several times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the blood continues to flow, then you should administer treatment and healing, using powders which I have recommended in various places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is near many nerves, then you should infuse powders in vinegar and burnt oil, and place those on the affected areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you should place powders soaked in water and oil or in vinegar and oil, and keep this moist until the third day, as we have said. Then you should open the abscess, clean it, and administer to its healing whatever is necessary until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses generally, but according to the method of distinction I have already said about each abscess in what manner is the way of its cure separately by chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On the sectioning of abscesses that occur in the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the neck of the head, small abscesses may occur, along with various types of nodes that contain membranes; and these types vary in many ways.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they are soft, and those that contain moisture similar to jelly.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	Of those things which contain humidity similar to dust, and resembling them; and of those things which are stony, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all things, and in the extraction of those [things], there is no fear, as the extraction of those does not oppose nature.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those [things] is that you express them with an instrument whose form is appropriate for this, which is called an entromes, until you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what it contains is humidity, then you should divide that with a section along its length according to a superficial section in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin the section from the line of .B. to the line of .G. When the humidity is evacuated, then you should excise that skin which contains the humidity, and do not leave any cause for harm, as closely observed wounds return if any cause remains.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with this and leave it for another day, as this will dissolve all that remains of the membrane.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then repeat the treatment on that wound with Egyptian ointment a second and third time if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that membrane; now treat the wound with the ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains hard lumps, then you should incise it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a section having the shape of a cross, and extract once between two lips of the section and scrape it thoroughly from all sides, and exert your skill in extracting the membrane that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If a wound from an arrow causes trouble, then at that time do what I have recounted first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, treat the abscess that has formed through section and treatment as we have said to you; and section on an abscess that has formed is easier, because it contains little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes there are some of these abscesses that occur in the head in certain people who do not have much moisture throughout their body; the cause is that I once incised an abscess on the head of an old woman and found it to be like a hard, rough, white stone, which could not be broken, and if anyone were to hit it, they would hurt themselves.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	However, in other abscesses that occur in the head, this is not the case with this chapter; also, regarding abscesses that appear on children's heads and behind their ears, the section for all of these should be a superficial incision.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the puncturing of those in the lower part so that the contents of the abscess can drain into the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And treat those accordingly with what is appropriate for that type of treatment.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the incision of scrofulas that occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These abscesses often occur in the neck, armpits, and groin; and sometimes they appear in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck often develop between the muscles, and every scrofula among them is within its own proper layer, just as with knots and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The species of these scrofulas are spots, for only some of them are stony, and of those only the ones containing moisture, and of those only the malignant ones which do not obey cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Then in that one which you find to be well disposed upon examination, the color of which is clearly manifest and matches the color of the skin, and it is soft throughout, and it is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and it is not hard; proceed to incise that at a superficial dryness above the part and below the body according to line .G. between the line .B., and peel that off entirely, and extend from the edges of the skin by one inch or two inches if you need those, as we have said concerning the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more cautious that the vein or nerve not be incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatula not be sharp, so that it does not cause you to cut unnecessarily with your hand, or disturb the patient, and do not incise what is not necessary to incise; for if you were to cut a vein or artery during your operation, immediately apply a green vitriol plaster or other powders which promote blood flow, and staunch the bleeding, and leave it there until the acute stage of the abscess subsides and the inflammation becomes mollified and begins to pus.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is constricted.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation once you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And immediately inquire at the time of the operation if there is any cause for the other small scrofulas, then incise those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the scrofula a large vein, avoid incising that scrofula at its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	And be careful to bind that one with a firm double bandage and let it fall by itself without harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old lint which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then treat that area.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise that scrofula completely, then be sure to approximate the two lips of the wound and sew them together immediately so that there is no room for any superfluity.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is room for superfluous fluid due to the size of the scrofula, then be sure to incise its root and evacuate it and administer sutures as described.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for the scrofulas that contain moisture, make a superficial puncture where it appears to you the place of maturation is, and pause before making another puncture deep into the base of the mass, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer punctures, cover them with ointment and similar applications, so that it aids in the corruption of what remains to be corrupted.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see the wound already cleansed, then treat it with an ointment of generative flesh so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the division of the pus duct of an accidental abscess in the groin.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	Thus did the ancients call this section in the epilogue, and I have not seen any man in our land who has performed that incision.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those people.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In men who have a weak constitution, it is advisable to avoid the extraction of the epiploon, as this cannot be done safely because all the veins and the main vessels are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have boils in the mouth or throat or behind the ears, when the illness is not in the bone, it is advisable to use the section of the epiploon to avoid the loss which is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do this, cut the epiploon below three circles of its own circles, or four for a smaller section along its length between two circles in quantity. The section should be made in the fat, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for cutting because it is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels there are few.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the physician is cautious, it is better to first extend the throat skin by one inch and then make an incision into the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any reason to do so.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut the fat as we have recommended; and it is significant regarding the section of the canal by the phlegm which is from that secretion and by the loss of voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And let the patient rest for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the hour is delayed due to fear of perforation, join two edges of the skin of the wound, but leave it slightly apart from the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation:
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Al-bucasis says that the main point of the speech which we have recounted is this: the exposition is nothing other than to see that some of these abscesses have already obstructed the windpipe of the patient, and the patient has come within a hair's breadth of death, and the air passage is cut off; therefore, some proceed to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the site of the wound by some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this reason, the command is to leave the pus inside until the maleficence of the illness is consumed; and the maleficence lasts for three days; therefore, at that time, the command is to treat the wound so that it may heal.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen myself is that a servant took a knife and inserted it into their windpipe and cut out a piece of the trachea, and I was called to treat them. I found the swelling as if it were that of a dying person, uncovered the wound, and saw the blood that had come from the wound in small amounts.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, I confessed that in that case, neither a vein nor any other part had been incised, and the air was coming out of the wound, and I treated it until she healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And nothing happened to the servant except that her voice became hoarse, and after some days she returned to improvement in her condition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that there is no fear in the section of the epiglottis.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the incision for an abscess that occurs in the windpipe outside, which is called a hernia of the windpipe.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This swelling, called the hernia of the groin, is a large swelling according to the colour of the body, and it occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it happens in two ways, for it is either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, there is no need for treatment.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental case happens in two ways; one of which is similar to fat nodes, and the other way is similar to a swelling caused by an artery knot, and in that case there is reason for concern.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is not appropriate to make an incision with a knife except in the case where it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should examine that and investigate it carefully with the finger, and if you find it similar to a fat node and not attached to any veins, then you incise it as you would with nodes and extract what is inside like that of hair and bursiclam; otherwise, you must thoroughly explore its nature, and subsequently treat the area with whatever is necessary for healing until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the Section of the Kinds of Nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	There are various kinds of nodes, and I have already mentioned all their kinds in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary for me to describe as well the difference between a node and an abscess so as to cause no doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, I say that in an abscess there is heat and fever and severe pain until the fermentation of the excess matter subsides; and it completes putrefaction at which point the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	This may not be heat nor fever nor pain, and it continues as if there were a lion's paw in that place.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a boil and it is made thus whether larger or smaller, and they are of two kinds, either dry containing heat, or greasy and containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are motley, as I say in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the treatment of this condition, express it and inquire about its beginning at the moment which is called intromission, as its form will come in the chapter which is near this one.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes, which is that you take this moment and insert it into the place most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will revolve it little by little until you know that the moment has already penetrated the tissue.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And according to the measure of the size of the abscess, you proceed accordingly, then extract the moment and observe what has come out in its wake.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the flowing moisture, of whatever color it may be, is found, then you incise it with a superficial cut as I have said regarding other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if from the wake of the moment you do not find moisture, then you know that it is greasy.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And make an incision over it in the shape of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	as I have taught you, and suspend it with threads, and scrape the tissue from all sides with ease, and preserve the skin or sac, if possible, over that area, and extract the pus from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If the maxilla is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract it whole, and you must break it up into pieces so that you can remove it bit by bit until nothing remains.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If any part of it breaks off for whatever reason, whether little or much, the remainder will return to its place according to the maxilla.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that any small part remains broken off, then apply a poultice of some corrosive powders and clean the wound, and place over it an abscess cauterizing agent, and treat it with another method until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the remaining piece is large, then you should suture both sides of it and treat it with something that promotes healing.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If a pulsating or non-pulsating vein is encountered, then tie it off and apply the dressing with vitriol three times so that the wound heals and the blood clot stabilizes; and afterward return to separate what is broken from the remainder.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those, there are instruments of three types, some of which are large, some medium-sized, and some small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium-sized instrument is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small instrument is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Here is the English translation:
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of the practitioners, and they are called albered, and one of them is called berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And it consists of three types, for among them is the great one, the medium one, and the small one.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the great practitioner, its form is as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the medium practitioner, its form is as follows:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small practitioner, its form is as follows:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	They are suitable for treating abscesses, excrescences, fistulas, and buboes, whether they affect the bones or other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	They make rods, thick needles, and lions, just as with large needles used to sew saddles, and they are made of citron wood, or wood, or iron, or silver. And the best ones are when they are made of citron wood.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	They are made by practitioners with black feathers, who agree that with these, fistulas in which there are reflections should be opened, so that the contents are reflected out due to their lightness through those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And it consists of three types, for some of them are long, and others are medium-sized, and the others are short, depending on the quantity and width of the fistula and its constriction.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The form of the great practitioner made of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The form of the medium-sized practitioner made of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The form of the small practitioner made of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the lancets are of various kinds, for some are simple, having only one curvature, and there are three types: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And their points are hooked, and there are three types of them.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those that have two curves, there are three types.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those that have three curves, there are three types.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The form of a large simple lancet is as follows:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of a medium simple lancet is as follows:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small simple lancet is as follows:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The form of a large hooked lancet is as follows:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The form of a medium hooked lancet is as follows:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small hooked lancet is as follows:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a large lancet having two curves is as follows:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The form of a medium lancet having two curves is as follows:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a small lancet having two curves is as follows:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a large lancet having three curves is as follows:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a medium lancet having three curves is as follows:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a small lancet having three curves is as follows:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the knives with which nodes and abscesses are excised, and there are three kinds, for among them is a large one, a medium one, and a small one.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of the large knife:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of the medium knife:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of the small knife:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The sharp ends of those with which acute incisions are made are such and the other ends are not blunt in this manner, but so that during the excision of nodes there is no fear of cutting a vein or nerve, and by them the patient may be healed and peace of mind restored somewhat due to the adjustment which follows the excision of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of forceps, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the large forceps:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of the medium forceps:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of the small forceps:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of iron and resemble a reed from which alcohol is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it has a pointed end on the left side with a spatula hidden in it, and along that edge are parts inside and outside, as you see when you want to.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the said forceps during the puncture of abscesses so that the patient does not perceive them, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of veins from which the blood flow is severed are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; the forms of these:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of thin skin, round in some length, and they are delicate.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And you should have these kinds of veins—large, medium, and small—so that with them you can sever the blood flow quickly when necessary, and at other times when primary medicine is not available.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to sever blood in all parts of the body, and use them only in fleshy areas such as the joints of the arms and legs, and the joints of the shoulders, and the breasts and abdomen and thighs, and similarly to the fleshly joints of humans.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes they are made of other small instruments resembling the teeth of combs according to this form; by which the blood is severed when performed for phlebotomy, or in incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of men's breasts that are similar to women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell due to an excess during sleep when they begin to mature, and subsequently their breasts swell and resemble those of women, and we call them Roman apostems or abscesses.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for that which you wish to excise, cut it in this lunar section from the line of .B. to the line of .G., then scrape away all the roughness, then fill the wound with flesh-generating medicine, then stitch together the two lips of the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the mammary gland inclines towards the sides and is softened by its size just as it does in women, then cut it into two parts with its pus inside, each part in sections resembling a lunar shape, of which each should be contained within the other at their ends, such that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from the line of .B. and the line of .G. Then scrape away the tissue between the two lips of the wound, remove the fat, and administer what we have mentioned about suturing and powders as necessary until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the excision of what needs to be cut due to the patient's discomfort and bleeding, then fill the wound with cotton soaked in a corrosive liquid and leave it until this corrodes what remains of the fat, and then care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the Incision of Abscesses That Occur Near the Throat.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that occur near the throat are often of the type known as scrofula, hard and covered with a thick skin.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of these, only some contain moisture; those that contain moisture should be cut in a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of .G. to the line of .B. And when all is evacuated from the abscess along with the pus, then fill it with dry cotton and leave it until the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	Let the cut be cleaned and treated with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the types of the glands or of the scrofula, then you should incise it as we have said in the section about scrofula similarly.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the plague has spread to the point of gangrene, then administer cauterization as we have previously mentioned.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the incision of abscesses that occur due to artery or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured and the part where it was located becomes inflamed, an abscess may occur. The signs by which one can recognize whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: for when the abscess is due to an artery, it tends to be elongated near the front of the body; and if you press on the abscess with your fingers, you will hear a sound like a whistle.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And when it is due to a vein, it is round on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the incision of this abscess is dangerous, especially when it occurs in the armpits, in the angles, in the neck, and in many parts of the body; it is serious, therefore care should be taken to avoid its surgical treatment, and if it is in the extremities or on the head, it should be avoided even more.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But in the case where it is due to inflammation of the artery opening, incise along the length of the part; and then carefully cut with hooks near the artery, and remove the tunics until it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Upon that needle I place and make it penetrate into the other side, and tie the artery with fine thread in two places, which procedure I explain in extracting two arteries, which are found in the temple.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then apply the place between two bandages with a poultice so that the blood comes out completely while it is there, and let the abscess be dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer treatment in which pus is generated so that the bandages can fall off; and subsequently treat it with appropriate remedies until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess due to the section of a vein, now you should have in your hand what is possible regarding the abscess and the condition, and then insert the needle below the place where you had below your hand, and make it penetrate; and tie it with double thread until you extract that from the other side, and subsequently ligature the abscess with a strong bandage as I have told you in the bandaging of vine leaves on both sides of the thread's extremities.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that the thread will come out, then insert the thread with that needle below all the abscess where the first incision was made, and tie the threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And then dry the abscess in its proper place so that when what is inside comes out, you incise the excess of the tissue, and leave what from it is adhered.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply powder that you have submerged in wine and oil, and subsequently administer the treatment with dressings and remedies until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter on the abscess which occurs due to nerve strain.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Just as an abscess occurs in arteries and veins, so too does an abscess occur in nerves when they are struck or due to excessive labor, and similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it happens mostly in the areas of the joints or heel, or in any place where the joints are often troubled.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	It is a severe abscess and its color resembles the surrounding tissue. It is one of the worse conditions when it occurs with vehemence, and the patient appears in a state similar to stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	It is not an abscess that aggregates at the front of the body, and because of this it is less painful. It affects the entire area equally and does not concentrate in front or back.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, when it occurs in the joints, it should not be bandaged with iron, for it will likely lead to contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But when it occurs in the head or on the forehead, apply treatment with spatum (a type of poultice).
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small abscess, then treat it with forceps and incise it carefully.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if it is large, then suspend it with ligatures, and excise it properly; afterwards, close the wound with sutures, and care for it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter XI.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the incision of an abscess that occurs due to swelling in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Therefore, for some people there are growths in their bellies and in other parts of their bodies which are called mushrooms by similarity to those fungi, whose root is fine and the head of it is thick; and often the lips of these are smooth, and they are small ones, and they are of those that move magnificently.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one in whom there were two parts in his belly which were larger and similar to mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones with fine roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those were inverted and split, and moisture ran from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Then I incised them and found one weighing about eighteen uncias and the other about ten uncias.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation during the incision of these is that you consider if the malady is humid, and the color of the tumor is white, humid, with a fine root; then you incise it with a broad scalpel, and immediately in your presence cauterize it over fire, for the moist growths should have their section expelled by much blood; and if the blood flows, cauterize that area.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the malady dry and fearful, guard against incising with iron; but now take fresh lead paste and apply it to that tumor, in the manner which we have described; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And immediately adjust the compression of the lead strip; therefore, do not stop applying the lead continuously until the tumor is separated and falls off by itself without effort.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If you are dealing with a large abscess and during its incision there is reason for fear and dread, especially if it is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you may incise most of it, and then afterward cauterize the area so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And afterwards, treat the wound until it is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to presume to incise an abscess that is dark in color, has little sensation, and is hard upon examination, for such an abscess is likely cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And here I will recall something regarding this.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LIILetters were slightly altered for clarity: Chapter LII
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of an umbilical hernia.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	An umbilical hernia is caused by various reasons; either by fissures in the abdominal wall above the abdomen, and through these openings the membrane or bowel protrudes as in other ruptures; or by a wound from which blood flows from a vein or artery depending on its location, or by trapped air.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is due to a fissure in the abdominal wall and the protrusion of the membrane, then the color of the swelling is similar to the color of the skin; it is soft without pain, and afterward appears in various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the protrusion of the bowel, then its appearance differs greatly from what we have described, and when you press on it with your fingers, it retreats, and afterward returns; and it is very sensitive to sound, and swells after bathing and hard work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	May it be soft because of moisture, so that when you press upon it with your hand, it is not hidden, nor is it constricted, nor is it hardened.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to pus, then at this point these signs appear, the abscess turning to a declining blackness.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is due to excess flesh, then the abscess is severe, large and hard, and is seated in proportion to a quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is due to airiness, then the touch of it is soft.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in it is that you consider now whether the prominence of the navel is due to pus from an artery, or a vein, or airiness; now it behooves you to be cautious about treating it, for there is fear and dread as I have taught you in the chapter wherein I have stated the abscesses from an artery and a vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the bowels or the membrane, then it behooves you to command the patient to lie on their back and extend themselves; then feel around the entire circumference of the navel, and then command them to stand between your hands on their back; then surround with a spatula at the edge of the navel where you have felt with your hand; then cut half of the abscess above one inch greatly; then tie around the edge with strong thread or cord in an appropriate manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then cut the center of the abscess extended over the ligature and insert your finger into that place to check for the bowels; and if you find them or guard them with the ligature, then you extract promptly and push the bowels to the sides within the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the cloth, then take one ounce of it; and incise the superfluities from it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then encircle that spot, and return to your operation; take two needles and place them in those two strong threads and insert the two needles in the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a crisscross manner, which you should make penetrate; and then compress the abscess into four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and let the place inside which the extended flesh may ooze and fall off by itself; or incise it when it has become softened and will ooze out, and then treat it with water from the herbs until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the swelling of the navel is made of flesh or because of humidity, then you should conquer the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or moisture that you find there, and then treat it with what is appropriate to heal and consolidate the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De curacio de cranc.	On the Treatment of Wounds.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said in the division about the types of wounds and in what manner they are treated with medicines, and that it is necessary for the treatment to be done carefully so that it does not become ulcerated; we have also discussed wounds born out of carelessness during their treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that in some cases wounds can be treated in a location where it is possible to eradicate them completely, such as wounds in the nipples or in the armpits and similar parts of the body allocated for removal, especially when they are beginning small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When it is old and hard, do not attempt to treat it yourself, for I cannot cure such a thing nor have I seen anyone else succeed in doing so.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation should be performed when it is prepared as we have said, that you proceed and allow the patient to purge from black bile several times, and then bleed them if a clear abundance of pus is found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for the operation in which it will be performed, and then place hooks on the wound as is necessary; and afterward wash all around with a good linen cloth to clean inside so that there remains no cause for infection.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow freely, and do not press it too roughly, and squeeze out the areas, and remove the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is available to you among the tools.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if it is contrary to your ability to stop thick blood clotting from a vein or artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood stops, and afterward treat it with other methods until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter .liv.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of hydrops (edema or fluid accumulation).
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, the types of hydrops related to water, and the signs of each type, along with their treatment using medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And the type that is treated with iron is only the single type of pleurisy, and not approached with iron for the types of tympanites or hydrothorax, for this is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this kind of tympanic hydrocephalus with medicines and do not confirm your treatment, now consider whether the patient has reached a state of debility or suffers from another illness along with that hydrocephalus, just as if it were in the chest or belly area and similar to those cases. Now guard yourself that you do not treat them with iron, for there is fear concerning this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	And if you see the patient with excessive vigor, and in them there is no other illness but hydrocephalus alone, and they are neither a child nor elderly, then the method of the operation for them is that you lift the patient between your arms, and the assistant approaches to press the abdomen of the patient with their hand, pushing the water out from below the navel, and then take spatum spinos in this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be made of two sharp parts long, with a pointed end like a lancet; however, it should gradually become shorter in length, so that during the operation you do not pierce into the bowel and injure it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider whether the origin of the hydrocephalus is from the bowels; if so, you should distance the incision from the navel by a length of three fingers below it, directly over the navel.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the origin of the hydrocephalus is from a kidney illness, then your incision should be to the left of the navel by three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the origin of it is from the liver, then your incision should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not advisable for your incision to be on the side on which the patient lies, so that the fluids do not flow to that place and cause harm.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	With an instrument, perforate entirely the wound, and then insert it into that section, and raise your hand with a spatula between the wound and the tissue, and you will scrape off that part; and if there is a quantity of one layer or around about.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then I perforate the tissue so that the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where the water is.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that part and insert an instrument of this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or ivory or lion's bone, at the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the tip of it is cut in the manner of a pen, as you can see.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the uppermost part of it is a ring, because when the instrument reaches the water, then immediately you should stop above the instrument, thus evacuating only a small amount of water at once, for if you evacuate as much as does not fit in one go, the patient may die from resolution of their vital spirit, or it will lead to imminent death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate from that according to the quantity of the patient's strength and according to what is indicated by the condition of the patient, the strength of their pulse, and their overall well-being.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and retain the water that is because it is immediately retained by the wound which holds the hole that is on the tissue of which you are instructed to perforate according to that method.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And prepare it again with the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates that, and extract from the water a small quantity, and do this with some days in between out of fear, and guard yourself against error so that you do not run out of the water before its time.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear for the patient, and give a large quantity of water, then bury him in fine sand, and sprinkle moisture on him in baths, and let him wait long hours in the sun; and treat him with drying medicines until he is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize the stomach and the intestines after the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what preceded.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 55.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children who are born with unopened passages for urine.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes some of the children are born from their mother's womb with their head not properly formed (or it is narrow or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, one should attempt to make a puncture for it as soon as the child is born using a fine instrument according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then insert a fine lead needle into the passage and secure it, and leave it in for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he needs to urinate, remove it and let him urinate; then return it afterward.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not insert the lead, it is possible that the urine which passes over that area will not allow this opening.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Let that of which the wound is narrow be treated with a lead splint, as we have said, for so many days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	Let those in which the wound is not in its place be treated as mentioned, the cause of which is that he who is born and the wound is behind the tip of the penis so that he cannot urinate to the sides; and it is not for generation, so that the semen cannot reach the major second rectitude, and this is a laghid disease.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the method of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, and you extend the tip of the penis with your left hand vigorously, and incise the head of the penis in the place of the foreskin with a sharp scalpel, as an incision of a feather, or that you shave some part so that the wound falls in the middle according to what is needed.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful during your operation to stop bleeding, as this often happens; and pause to address the bleeding before you proceed with the incision, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 56.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	About the ulcer that occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and about corruption, blackness, and adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	This ulcer often occurs in the penis and is a soft flesh prominence.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	For non-malignant cases, suspend one ounce of the subtle medicine and abscind that which contains all the matter; then apply a poultice made from Egyptian onion; afterwards, treat it with decoction until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if it is malignant and of dark color, then you should administer cautery around the incision and the edges.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the ulcer is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one part of the ulcer is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove the part that is inside at the beginning until it is healed; afterwards, treat the part that is outside, because when treating both parts simultaneously with the foreskin, it is not certain that it will not be damaged.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if blackening and corruption occur in the genitals and foreskin, then you should excise everything that is already discolored and what is about to become corrupted or is already corrupted; and afterwards apply a bandage soaked in honey, which has been crushed with ground and sifted barley bran.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And afterwards treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is bleeding, then administer lunar cautery according to this method:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because such cautery is beneficial in two situations simultaneously: for bleeding and for the corruption of wounds.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed at that time, then you should insert a lead cannula into the urethra so that the patient can urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in one whose foreskin is his, and circumcision is not required on him; and when adhesion occurs due to disease or abscess) you should scrape with a blunt spatula until the bandage dissolves and the head of the penis is released entirely.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to distinguish them delicately, then you should scrape with a spatula some part of the head of the penis and the foreskin, and this is because when the foreskin is fine, its fineness easily penetrates due to its subtlety.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a fine thread, which has already been moistened in water, so that they do not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then treat with styptic juice to ensure it is healed and consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the cleansing of children and the treatment of what occurs during circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution that interrupts like other diseases: but since it is part of our practice and our will, and since it specifically applies to children, it is necessary that we determine the best procedure and the most gentle way to ensure their well-being.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they do not use it in their laws, and this is because we have acquired it through experience. The reason I have found is that most surgeons and barbers use a scalpel and scissors for circumcision and cleansing; they use bandages made of fine cloth and stitching with a needle.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	Thus I have described all these methods and did not find a better modification with scissors, with thread as in the procedure using the fingernail, since most times you avoid the foreskin above, because the foreskin of the prepuce has two tunics, and remove the tunic below, and it is necessary for another incision and certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in the modification which is done by alphabetization, which is digital, used by surgeons, the incision at the extremity of the male member is not guaranteed, since it easily enters into the space there.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with the fingernail, easily you can err and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of the child is short by nature, and often seen in such a way that there is no need for modification, and I have seen that.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But regarding the modification that is done with scissors and thread made of silk, the quality, through experience I discovered this, because the scissors should be proportionate to the incision, for what lies above is as sharp as what lies below; and thus when you press your hand according to these two sharps, and make the incision accordingly at once; and it is done with compression of the silk thread in a shape containing the foreskin all around, by which there is no error whatsoever.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the method of the first operation is that you should have the child lie down if it is one who can be treated gently, so that you only tie the thread around his penis and leave it for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make him happy in every way that is possible to you according to what he can understand.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Let him then be placed between your legs prepared, and let it not be seen by anyone; and hide the scissors in your hand or leave them elsewhere, so that the child does not see them nor any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Then put your hand between his thighs and blow into the vein, and pull it in so that the head of the lancet exits, and then clean that which is attached to it from impurity.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then apply the marked place with honey doubly, and then ligature the lower part of that slightly with the second ligature, and then put your finger in the location below the ligature well retained, and incise between two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then raise the vein gently and extract the head of the lancet; and then let the blood flow little by little, for it is better; and apply powder above and on top of the powder place a cloth soaked in vinegar from hen's urine mixed with recently refined good oil; and leave that upon that until the next day; and treat it with care until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the scissors for cleaning is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let one set of blades be blunt and the other sharp, so that the tip of the blade does not protrude, and let the length of both cutting edges be equal to the length of two thumbs equally.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the mistake in cleaning is that you may forcefully avoid the intrinsic vein entirely, or part of it due to the incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you should extend that from your hour to your nail in front of the swelling of the area and incise it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, now extract it with a probe and incise it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	And if three days have passed and the swelling below the testicle has subsided, now allow what is inside to be discharged once the abscess is cauterized, and scrape that which is easily accessible, and incise it as soon as you are prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the head of the testicle, for it should not be affected by this.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore, treat that with what the plague cures from the powders which we have recommended in the chapter on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised from the tendon too much, and you follow the instructions above, do not pay attention to this.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And therefore, treat that with what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LXXX.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or blood clots, or pus or flesh, and similar conditions as those we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine does not dissolve, and retention occurs because of a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, now have the patient arch their back on their heels.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place the feet of the patient on their buttocks and extend their abdomen from below their back, and have the patient pull their legs as much as is possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, when the neck of the bladder is compressed during the expulsion of the stone to the rear parts, urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved by the water that we have mentioned and violent means are necessary to address the malady, then it becomes necessary to administer extraction with an instrument called a siringua, which has the following form: It should be made of silver and be as thin as a quill pen, about half the thickness of a sparrow's feather, and its length should be similar to a palm and a half, and at its tip there should be a slender tube.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of testing the urine with it is that you take a thin piece of thread and tie it securely to one end of wool or cotton; then insert the ends of the thread into the lower part of the siringua, and if there is any excess of wool, cut it with scissors so that it can be inserted into the tube forcibly. Then gently pull on the siringua while holding an egg white nearby.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And place the patient on the cot, and raise the bladder of the patient and the penis with olive oil and myrrh.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the siringua gently until it reaches the base of the penis; and then bend the penis above the part where it is bent; and then push the siringua inside until it reaches the bladder, and that will ensure the stone to be reached without any obstruction, and if this order is not followed, but instead the path in which it goes tortuously.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then slowly pull the thread along with the wool little by little, as the urine will wet the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Here is the translation:
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Regarding the quality of enemas for the bladder, with a clyster syringe and similar instruments, which are appropriate for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When ulcers or abscesses occur in the bladder, or when blood is clotted there, or when a foul discharge is obstructed, and you wish to introduce water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but at the end of it is blunt, that is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that part there are three parts: two of one side, as you can see.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning, it is concave, in which what is to be introduced is placed, and its quantity should be appropriate for filling that space without addition, so that when any cause draws out the moisture, it can be drawn out, and when expelled, with it, according to how far it is expelled, as a clampcedra has naphta applied to it in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to introduce moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the moisture, and draw in the liquid that is introduced into the upper parts, as the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end of the clampcedra into the urethra as we have recommended in the circular part; and then introduce the moisture with the liquid you are introducing, as that moisture will reach the bladder quickly, and thus relieve the condition.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the clyster syringe with which the bladder is enemasmed is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or lead, with its head being like a small feather, and below the joint the length of a finger.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And take a bladder of an animal, and put in it the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and then tie it tightly between two strong ligatures made of fine thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the end of the crystallizer into the tube.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then press your hand on the bladder with the humidity until it is stretched properly so that you can feel when that humidity has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if a bladder is not available to you, now take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle; and perforate that throughout its entire roundness; then insert strong thread into those holes, both ways; and then attach the circle as it should be attached in this manner, so that you place in it what you want from various humidities, oils, and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then tie that to the instrument and do it as you did with the bladder, and press with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the Extraction of Stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already mentioned in the division the kinds of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and stones generated in the bladder, and the signs of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have described the stone in which this manual operation is performed, and its section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And he who wishes to narrate it does so with clarity and conciseness.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, I say that the stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and among the signs of it is that the urine expelled from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety but contains sediment like sand; and the patient scratches his genitals frequently, and there are times when he experiences pain, and shortly after he becomes erect; and for these reasons you will understand this condition.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is easier to treat children with that condition before they reach fourteen years of age; and the treatment is difficult for older individuals.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in young people it is somewhat easier compared to those who are older.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And for the one in whom the stone is larger, the treatment takes longer; and if it is small, the opposite is true.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, to achieve the treatment of this condition, we begin by cleansing the patient's bladder by extracting all the sediment that is within its folds; for this sediment sometimes prevents the passage of the stone due to obstruction.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then the patient should be placed on their back and pressed firmly to help the stone descend to the neck of the bladder or jump to another location.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then place the patient with their legs raised and prepared, and have them lie on the side where the stone is located, so that the bladder inclines towards that side.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And thus he examined it and all around it.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel the stone in the space, now you should cut it out immediately.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not catch it right away with your touch, now you should anoint your index finger of the left hand, if a girl, or the middle finger if a boy who is older, with oil, and insert that into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And examine the stone until you feel it with your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually turn it little by little into the bladder neck.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on it with your finger, and expel it outwards towards the place where you made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the thighs outward with one hand, and with the other hand to pull back the skin that is in front of the thighs, at the place where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a spatula of the following shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and make an incision between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle, but to the left side; and let the incision be on that stone and your finger be in the anus, and make a transverse incision so that the external part of the incision is wide and the internal part narrow according to how much you can extract from the stone, as much as possible without being too large, because it is easy for your finger, which is in the anus, to press the stone out after the incision.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there are some stones which have angles and edges, because of which it is difficult to remove them.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And there is one that resembles a hedgehog's spine, it is round, and it is easy to remove.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Then for that one which has angles and edges, adjust it into the crevice.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not inserted properly, now cover it over that area, or tighten around it with a suitable grip, the end of which should be like a file with which you tighten around the stone, and do not let go of it; or insert an delicate instrument with a curved end beneath it.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot do it around that area, now expand the wound a little, and if you see blood flowing, cauterize it with vinegar acid.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise it there; and then gently move a little towards that area; and similarly do this if they are in clusters more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then it is ignorance to cut that with a large section, because this causes the patient one of two bad outcomes: either death or that they become subject to continuous urine dripping, because the area does not heal completely.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer an expulsion to remove it internally, or devise a fracture of it with forceps to extract it in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then when you have completed your operation, now fill the wound with aloe fibers and dragon's blood, and cauterize it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And apply on that cloth infused in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water mixture, so that the abscess may yield.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And apply the poultice on the affected area of the neck, and do not loosen the bandage within the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that bandage is removed, wash the area with water and a little oil, and then apply a cleansing ointment and a healing ointment until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if an abscess occurs in the wound, it is adhust and corrosive, and appears as if the blood is frozen in a bladder (and this is known by the mixture of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if left untreated it will cause corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with sour wine, water and salt, and apply whatever is appropriate to hasten its healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And throughout the entire healing process, you should observe both the conditions and adjust the medicines that are applied to the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and in the urethra, and stuck there, and urination is prohibited, then treat it with what I recommend before proceeding to surgery, for many have been accused of performing unnecessary surgery due to this treatment; and thus I advise that you take a fine iron probe, which has the following shape:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a triangular end, sharp, attached to a handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Take some oil, and pour it over the rod below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Insert the tool into the rod with ease until it reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	Rotate the tool gently with your hand against the stone little by little, and you will gradually enlarge the opening so that it can penetrate from one side to the other; for urine will soon be released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then press your hand on what is broken of the stone that is outside the rod, for this part is shattered and will be expelled with the urine, and the illness will be cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some cause that prohibits it, then pour oil below the stone and some oil above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then incise on the stone in that rod between two bindings.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then loosen the binding and clean the collected blood, which has formed in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary to bind oil below the stone except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other binding above it should not be removed, for when the oil is bound near the extraction of the stone, the wound will return to its place and heal the injury.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason, when you pour oil above, it is necessary to elevate the wound to the upper parts or return to your care as we have said, so that the injury heals.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the Extraction of Stones from Women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If a stone is found in one of them, the treatment is difficult at that time, and it is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of the reasons is that the woman's body is very weak.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	The second reason is that you do not find many women who are honest enough to confess to their condition, whether they are unmarried or married.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third reason is that you do not find many women who are knowledgeable about this art, especially the operation itself.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The fourth reason is that the location for the incision to remove a stone in women is far from the location of the stone, which requires a large incision, and there is fear associated with it.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	However, if necessity compels you to do this, then it is necessary for you to find an experienced and honest woman surgeon, but few are found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	However, if you do not have access to such a person, then seek a skilled and careful man surgeon, or present a midwife who is knowledgeable about women's conditions, or a woman who has some part of the knowledge in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, present that person, and command him to do everything you instruct, from the examination of the stone at the beginning; the reason for this is to check if the woman is honest, so he should put his finger in her back passage to feel for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Thus if you find it there, cut it below the joint, and then order him to sew it up.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if it is not a virgin, then order the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and feel for the stone, as she places her left hand on the bladder, and compress that area properly.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Thus if you find it there, then proceed to gradually extract that from the opening of the bladder towards the lower parts as far as is possible within its reach until it reaches the end of the issue.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then sew up that apposition in the middle of the vagina at the end of the issue from whichever side is convenient for you and center the stone in that place, so that the finger does not dislodge the stone when cut below it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the amount by which you know the stone will be expelled from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the types of stones are various: some are small and hard, others are sharp and rough, long and round, and having edges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Thus you should know the types of stones according to what you understand and wish to convey about them.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you wish for blood to flow, apply vitriol thrice to that area for one hour until the blood is drawn, and then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	Take care to prepare for yourself the instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of stones from men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see bleeding, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that has been incised, then sprinkle powder on the site and dress it with powders and bandages, and do not repeat this; and leave the stone and do not extract it, for the patient will likely die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the intensity of the bleeding has subsided after some days and the area has healed, then return to your operation until the stone is dislodged.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of section on hernia preparation.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia aquosa is nothing but an aggregation of moisture in the white band that lies below the tendon of the groin muscles, which is called a band.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And in some cases, it is in the proper fatty layer that nature has prepared for the region of the groin, where it appears as if another hernia; and it is the tendon of the groin between the white band we have mentioned, and this is not so quickly apparent.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the groin muscles, because this matter accumulates there; and sometimes it happens due to impact on the groin muscles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture may have various colors, for its color can incline to yellowish or blood-red, or reddish, or be black and thick, or be watery and white, and the latter is preferable.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of fluid such as this is: for if it is in the white tissue which we have mentioned, then at that time the boil is round and inclined a little in length like the figure of an egg, and the gland appears, because the moisture contains that from all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper fatty tissue, then the boil is round like half an egg, and for this reason it is estimated to be another kind of egg.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the tendon of the glands and the white tissue, then feel below the center.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then express the color of the moisture in the boil at the incision site; and according to what is seen in the signs of the incision, judge of what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of it with iron, then see that you command the patient to be bled if that is possible for you, and apply the body of the instrument to it.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And let it be raised up on the back slightly on some reason, and place below it moist cloths.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And you stand on the left side of him, and command the assistant to be on the right side of him, who extends his arm to one of the two sides to the tendon of the glands and to the part near the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a broad spatula and cut the tendon of the glands at the middle place along its length towards the navel.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And the incision should be made according to the rule equally distant from the line that you should follow on the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white membrane.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And scrape that area, and observe, and be careful so that you do not incise it; and your scraping of the place where you are scraping should continue until it is suspended on the muscle more finely, and examine the scraping according to what is possible for you in quantity.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the white membrane with water through a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two edges of the incision with forceps, and extend the white membrane in both directions; and do not touch the tissue around the genitals, and incise the white membrane in that manner as is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And incise that area entirely or in pieces, and especially the lateral part finely, for if you do not examine the incision meticulously, there is no assurance that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the muscle protrudes from its tissue at the time of your operation, after you have completed the incision of the white membrane, return it inside, and then adjust the two edges of the genital tissue with sutures, and then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the muscle corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary for you to ligate the vessels that are above the suspensory ligament, remove the muscle, and then treat it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is accumulated in two separate areas, then you will know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that area as you did in the other equally; and if it appears to you to be an operation, then you should perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you should wipe away the blood, and insert cotton soaked in oil or rose oil into the sections; and place over that another piece of cotton which has been dipped in vinegar and oil; and spread this over both groins and the abdomen; and cover with folded cloths and poultices, and bind all these together with a bandage in the following manner:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then two cloths should be taken and filled with crumpled cotton according to this pattern; and the ends should be made such that they press against the skin or moistened wool, and they should be attached to the structure in the girdle of the trousers, and one end of them should take hold at the buttocks inside the other, and the second should take hold at the part of the pant, and two ends over two thighs, and two other ends over two flanks, and all binding should be adjusted in the girdle of the trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of sectioning with a knife; and it is that you take a thin cautery blade and incise the groin seam with it, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white fatty tissue containing the fluid is exposed, and then you take a cautery in this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it resembles the Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce with that cautery, and ignite it until all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the fatty tissue with hooks, and lift it with hooks, and cauterize it with a thin ignited cautery; and incise it as much as is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and be careful that the hand does not touch the fire.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and longer-lasting in stopping blood flow, and better than an operation with cutting.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if an abscess or inflammation opposes you at the time of cutting or cauterizing, or bleeding, then treat according to what contradicts you for that purpose, with a treatment that suits what is said second.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is weak and does not dare to undergo a second operation because of its horror, then administer a puncture as I recommend; and it is when you are certain, from what we have said about the signs, that the hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Now it is necessary for you to have the patient sit on some elevated cushion, then puncture the abscess at its lowest part below the navel, and extend the incision according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the incision be wide enough so that all the water can flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then make an incision over the area and ligate it there, so that the remaining water can drain out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat it so that the illness is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if an obstacle prevents the escape of water when you puncture it: and this is done only because the white membrane in the opening of the abscess obstructs and prohibits the exit of water, then you must place a probe or instrument used to extract water from hydrothorax into the abscess; or apply compression to the abscess with a small object.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns, and it is kept for about five months or so; and when it has been prepared in this way, then at that time it should be perforated according to that method, because thus the patient will have passed his days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter lxiii.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the section about flesh hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the section about this hernia, there is great fear of danger in its major occurrences; therefore, in my opinion, it is best to avoid it and be saved by that better course.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am now recalling the operation on that one and the specifics of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses occur in those parts where the genitals are composed, and this happens for various reasons: either due to acute sharp superfluity, which is discharged into the genitals, or due to impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the skin, and there is no relief from the pain, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And when the abscess is stone-like, its color is dark, and there is no comfort from it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And at times it is caused by the knotting of arteries, and by the swelling of those that have already been perceived through memory, or by the swelling of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But what is caused by the swelling of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press on it with your fingers; and it does not need to be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	May it be known that what is done by inflating a vein is not dispersed for any cause due to the compression among those mentioned.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible to perform a section on this particular area and on other flesh; you should cut the tendon of the genitales, and nearby there lies the groin, extract that from the white fat, and free the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, tie them, and cut the suspensories after you have freed it from all parts of the groin.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Then if the groin has already united with those flesh wounds, now you should extract the groin and cut it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion due to any cause within the fat, or between what is between the vessels, now you should free all of that adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if it is a growth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, now you should cut all that there is, and extract the groin as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then when your operation is complete, now fill the wound with wool infused in olive oil and wine; and afterwards care for that with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter .lxiv.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernia that is of vital parts.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	A vit is an abscess wrapped in some covering similar to a boil on the softening of the testicles, and it makes exercise and walking difficult due to the condition.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	In the treatment of this disease, one must be cautious because it is preceded by a certain condition or symptom.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, it is necessary to mention the operation as it was performed initially.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And he says that you should make the patient sit on a raised chair; then pull up the scrotum with your fingers; and then place your hands on the groin muscles and grasp the testicles firmly with them and the penis; and have another assistant, different from yourself, extend those [parts] vigorously.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then incise with a sharp, narrow spatula across the middle of the scrotum so that the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Then carefully cut away in all directions as we have said regarding the extraction of arteries, which is done on flaps.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Then place a needle with double thread in one of them and tie it at the first site where you cut, and tie it again at the last site.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Then incise them in the middle part with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated from the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Then treat the wound as you would any other wounds to ensure proper healing, so that the vessels do not cause one of the testicles to darken, because it is not harmful for this to occur.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if it happens to all the vessels, then it is necessary either to remove the testicles or to attach them to the vessels so that they are deprived of all nutrition due to the incision of the vessels, and thus become atrophied, or to attach them in such a way that no benefit can be gained from them.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the Treatment of Intestinal Hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that happens when the cicatrix extends over the abdomen on the side of the groin, because through this rupture some of the bowels enter.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the cicatrix or near it, and these two types occur for various reasons: either by impact, by jumping, by crying out, by lifting some heavy object, or by similar actions.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the cicatrix, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not happen suddenly, and it appears as an abscess because the cicatrix compresses the bowel.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it is due to a section of the cicatrix, for at the beginning it causes intense pain suddenly; and it appears as a different abscess near the groin area, because the bowel has been pushed out, and the body of it is outside the cicatrix.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And in some cases, the membrane is torn along with the bowel, and this type of intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And in some cases, it is caused by gas, and in some cases the bowel develops a tear, and this remains there, causing great pain to the patient, and often causes severe pain when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of these types of this illness with iron, there is fear, for it is advisable to avoid using instruments in such cases.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	Here is the translation:
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	From the side cut the channel through which the cord of the testicles is connected above, and incise the channel of the testicles all along its length; then place hooks in both sides of the section as you deem necessary to hold the section open with them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if you consider the section according to the quantity that it is possible for you to remove from it.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then remove the fatty tissue around it until the white hard capsule of each part is revealed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Now insert your finger in the incision made for the testicle, between the white capsule that is behind the cord, and between the other membrane, and separate any adhesion that is in the part behind the cord.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then tie the cord of the testicles to the parts behind, and with that stretch the white capsule upwards with your left hand, and lift the cord with the capsule to the part of the incision; and instruct the assistant to extend it upwards while you dissolve the adhesion that is behind completely.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And carefully with your fingers ensure that there is no cause for the bowel being wrapped around the white hard capsule.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause for it, now you push that back into the abdomen behind it.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle with a thick thread of seven fibers, and insert it through the rear of the capsule, which is below the cord that you have cut; then suture the parts that protrude from the thread until there are four threads, and then tie them together in the form of a cross; bind those threads to the capsule that is behind the cord with a strong knot on both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Here are the extremities of the veins, wrap them tightly with a bandage so that some of the vessels through which they receive nourishment cannot transmit any cause from which an abscess might arise.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And after another three days, apply a second bandage over the first one; then leave exposed from this bandaging an area about the size of the breadth below the scrotal skin above the testicles; and incise all around it according to its roundness, and remove what is inside.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then incise below the scrotal skin of the testicles in such a way that blood and pus flow as we have recommended in what we have said previously.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound and place it over it; and apply the bandage we have recommended (and occasionally the exposed area is cauterized, as mentioned after the incision to prevent excessive bleeding, which happens sometimes); and leave the bandage on until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the dressing is delayed, then hot water should be applied to it, and place it over the wound as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with the usual methods for treating wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	On Ventral Hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this type of hernia, there is none who has dared to treat it with surgery.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the early practitioners said that it should be treated as we have recommended for hernias caused by veins; which is to tie off the veins near the site with ease; and then dry up in the middle area around the abscess until the veins collapse.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	Regarding the treatment of wounds as we have said until they are healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	About the incision that is made in the glands.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	In some cases, an incision is made in the glands as we have said, and the location is examined.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And they do not provide any cause for the sacs in the groin; and if they do provide a cause, it is rare; and it returns at all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged with this condition, a small opening is adjusted in the scrotum through which the sac descends into the scrotum; and this happens due to the extension of the scrotum, as we have said, which is near the glands, because it causes the area to soften and become swollen, and this is examined.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment for it is as described by cautery, just as was preceded in the narration.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And in some cases, it is treated with iron according to this method: the patient lies on their back between the thighs, and then the area of the rupture of the abscesses is dried by cutting across its width according to a length of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then stretch the white scrotum that is below the groin until it is exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the cautery and place it on the prominent part of the scrotum, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then mark the two prominent points on either side of the scrotum at its extremity, and sew one to the other with a suture.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	From this extract the extremity of the vein should be tied off, and do not incise the mesentery throughout its entire length, nor extend the wound, nor any other cause such as I will make you know in the treatment of an intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And similarly in treating this as you would treat other wounds, when you incise the tissues, clean that area and restore the wound before it is consolidated; for the mesentery is contracted and does not adjust to the prominence of rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is best in this place, for it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the cord of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Often the cord of the testicles is softened in some men because the tissues that are within it are softened, and this requires careful attention.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for the one who is asked to treat this condition to place the patient in a position according to his need, and incise the entire cord which is softened over the natural cord; and then adjust two edges with suturing.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, cut away the excess of the softened cord at three or four places and secure it with firm sutures.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then incise between the sutures; and then treat as you would other wounds until it is healed and the tissues have knitted.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	On Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but for the cause it is read to me which makes me remember it in this book; and the remembrance of it is not necessary except for two ways, of which one is so that when someone is asked about it by a physician who seeks treatment, he knows the cure for it when it happens; and the other way is that we have sometimes need of castration of other beasts for our use through them, such as horses, oxen, and pigs, and similar to these animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And thus I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by excision or by division and cutting.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in the one that is performed by excision, the method of the operation is that we should bathe the animal in warm water until the testicles become softened and relaxed and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand until they are released and do not appear below the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration performed by division and cutting, make sure you hold the animal and press the scrotum of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then lift the suspensory ligament, and make an incision on each side with a cut so that two sides are processed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then make an incision on those parts after you have peeled each one.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause for infection on those parts, but rather make the incision subtle so that it is above the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better, which is done by inversion, because inversion leaves little cause for the animal to desire sex.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And properly treat the illness until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphrodism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphrodozia in men is according to two methods: one is when there appears in the space between the testicles, where hair of a female nature grows.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes in that case urine is discharged from the place between the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, there is one type: it is that the female genitalia above the pubis appears as two testicles of a man slightly below and forward as the scrotum of a man with two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three types: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	It is that you should cut away those tough tissues until the excess is removed, and then treat them as you would other illnesses.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second type for men, from whom urine is discharged from the place between the testicles, there is no treatment or surgery to be performed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On the treatment of hanging and protruding flesh due to causes related to women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	This dark spot is usually light in color and is adjusted according to natural causes within which it is situated and made legible with regard; and some are magnified in some women so much that it spreads just as in men and reaches up to the act of intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then you should remove the excess of the spot with your hand or with unguent and incisions.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not proceed with incisions, especially near the root of the hair, so that there is no flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And immediately treat that with the care used for wounds so that it may be healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Hidden flesh is the flesh that grows in the fold beneath the mother's tail where it fills that area, and it is usually situated at the parts around like a tail (and for this reason some of the earliest called this "tail disease"); then you should incise it just as we do with spots, and treat it so that it may be healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	On the Treatment of Alopecia.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Alopecia is when the woman's hymen is not perforated, or the opening is small.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	It is accidental due to a previous illness, and that is caused either by flesh poorly adjusted or by subtle or thick phlegm.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it occurs either near the root of the tail, or on its sides, or at the upper part of it, or at the lower part, and you should prohibit intercourse and conception and childbirth, and usually menstruation is also prohibited.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	Of that knowledge is made by observation of the menstruation, if the obstruction is apparent, proceed; but if it is not apparent, then at that time do around it with your fingers or with a probe.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to fine scabs and it can be reached with two forceps, then grasp it and remove it.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And place sponges over the two forceps, and then place your fingers or probes near both sides.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should lie on her back, her buttocks raised, and then spread the two forceps forcefully so that the fine scab is broken and the obstruction is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take some lint and soak it in oil and place that over the area, and have the patient return daily so that the cut does not heal too quickly.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the scab is thick and dense, then you should cut it with a scalpel or a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to flesh, then lift it up slightly and cut it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And have with you the medicines that stop blood flow without causing pain, such as hystiatia, dragon's blood, and ensus, mixed with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a lead tube that is wide so that the wound does not heal too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep that in place for several days and administer dry lint.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And let it be treated along with the other treatment for consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And in some cases accidents occur during the major separation of other tissues, and at such times it is necessary to incise according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if this is due to chronic abscesses, do not make any opposition to the abscess that is in the major part in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids and similar conditions that occur in the genital area of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are appreciated as the openings of small veins from which blood flows continuously; and when these hemorrhoids become old, they form into nodes.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And now I have mentioned in the division the species of these and the signs of them, and to say which of them receive treatment and which do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and nodes when they are in the vicinity of the major part and do not appear to the senses, at such times there should be no treatment applied to them.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are at the opening of the major part and which can be felt, these are the ones that are treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And you must place the woman in a comfortable position and then extend those nodes with forceps or with a rough cloth, and incise them with scissors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder should be applied to them to promote the flow of blood from one of the powders used for incisions without chewing, such as acacia and similar substances.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Then warm his feet for an hour, and then immerse them in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then have him sit in a decoction of sumac, orange peels, walnuts, and similar substances.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then take flour of barley and mix it with honey and vinegar to make a plaster, which you should apply to his back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is clotting, that is good; but if not, apply cupping glasses to the back and make incisions at the breast.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then take wool and soak it in the juice of cilantro or anise or fennel mixed with sour wine, and apply it to the affected area; then treat the area with ointments until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But if the patient is of rugged constitution, you may incise what needs to be opened according to what has been said about it in detail.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And treat the area until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On Piercing the Bladder in Cases of Accidental Injury to the Abdomen.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various types of abscesses occur in the abdomen, such as gangrenous, stone-like, ulcerative, hemorrhagic, phlegmonous, herpetic, fistulous, hemorrhoids, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already described these diseases and their types and the signs of them, and their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	Here is the translation:
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider whether the pain of the abscess in its beginning is sharp due to percussion and phlegm and fever, and if you see that redness appears and feel the sensation there, at that time do not treat it with puncturing, and cure it with what aids maturation until the acuity of the symptoms subsides.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then you should have the woman lie on a bed with two pillows; and let her recline on her back and adjust her legs below the abdomen, and spread out her thighs, and place her arms below her elbows, and bind certain parts with bandages as is appropriate.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife should approach from the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the birth canal is to be enlarged, the form of which will be described in the following sections.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you wish to administer this instrument, place it along the axis of the birth canal of the woman, and ensure that what is inserted into the birth canal does not exceed its diameter and causes harm.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the diameter of the birth canal, then you should place pillows against the tissue around the birth canal to prevent any instrument from being inserted into it.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And you should place the screw that runs along the side of the instrument, and have the minister hold the instrument while turning the screw until the opening of the birth canal is enlarged.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the secretion appears and is touched with the hand and feels warm and moist, then you should dry that part of it with a dry piece of linen.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the sanies is evacuated, then place upon the wound a medicated cotton dipped in rose oil or vinegar which has some styptic quality; and let the poultice be applied to the area around the main part of the wound.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place around the main part of the wound, and on top of the linen cloth, clean cotton dipped in water in which mallows have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And it should be treated appropriately for about two days until you find the method that is suitable for healing it.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the wound and the affected area are washed with water so that it is cleansed with water and honey, and then with water in which lily root or long pepper has been boiled, and then return to the appropriate treatment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep in a damaged area, then you should be prohibited from treating it with iron, except treat it as we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to treat male infants when there is an abnormal condition according to the figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of normal childbirth by its signs, and it is when you see the woman push downward with her parts and desire to breathe in the air, and she is illuminated by what is above her, and hastens the delivery of the infant, then you know that this birth is according to natural figure, and the delivery is over its head, and the second one either suspended or hanging from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	When you see those signs, then it is necessary to compress the abdomen so that the embryo descends gently because when they descend upon their head, they are delivered from there on the second stage, and this is cleaned of those superfluities by proper cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	This other type of delivery is unnatural and disgraceful, for when the embryo is born on its buttocks and the body of it is born before its head and feet, or one hand or foot first, or the head and a hand or foot, or the belly, and quickly turns over onto its neck, resembling the figures of those that are disgraceful.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those matters, and to guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And thus showing all the figures of those and which origin is in those so that it may be signified by this and stand upon this.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus is born upon its head by natural effort, and it is difficult for the woman and childbirth is hard, and if the strength of the woman has already been weakened, then give that medicine to her, or let the women have this, and evaporate the sweat from her with fenugreek seeds and moist oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then the midwife should insert her fingers gently and split the second stage, or dry that with her fingernail until it stops being moist.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the abdomen of the woman so that the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not descend, then the woman should be cleaned with powder of feathers and powder of fenugreek with scissors.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And he commands the assistants, near the surgeons, to hold him cramped and make him sneeze with appropriate conditions; and place his mouth and nose under something for one hour, because the effect will be apparent immediately.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both of the parts of the operation are immediately successful, then you should reduce those with ease little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if you do not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a cushion and lift her up off it, and then strike the cushion on the ground; and hold the woman so that she does not fall due to the impact.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the parts are not returned to their proper place and the operation fails, then you should incise those areas and extract the remnant of the operation or tie the body part with a thread and extract it in an equal manner, because this will be immediately effective.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	And from this point, lift the embryo onto its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the operation is on its feet, then you should push those upward, and then turn the operation slightly, and then equalize it, and then take hold of one part and extend them little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when it is inserted into the things, then you command him to expel it, and make him sneeze with appropriate conditions, because it will be immediately effective if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not immediately effective with what we have recommended, then you return the operation little by little until you place it back in its natural position, because it will be immediately effective at this point.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited to use all that we have recommended, then take mustard meal and dissolved gum, and pound it all in the mortar with good pounding, and afterwards mix it with water the hand of the woman, at the base of her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And afterwards apply that paste in hot water until it reaches the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the lower parts of him are cleansed and treated, then perform the smoke inhalation with myrtle and apply that beneath him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when he has the sub-inhalation for one hour, then have him sit on a cushion, and afterwards make him sneeze and clear his mouth, and remove that, and press the lower part of his abdomen with gentle compression, because the gas will soon be expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Encourage the expulsion of the gas over his teeth and his hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the gas is expelled in this manner, then gently insert his small fingers little by little; and afterwards have the woman lie on her side with her head elevated, and place his feet down, and let them both sit on the bed, and comfort his hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then gently press on his abdomen little by little, and afterwards extract what is below his feet from the ears to the area just prepared.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the gas is not expelled, then take his feet and move them vigorously, and then gently press on what is above the hypochondria little by little until the gas can rise.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then gently insert his fingers and encourage the expulsion of the gas little by little, and command the woman to exert herself until the gas is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	This is a suspension of the testicle pendulous laterally from one of its sides.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Try to reduce the dislocation of the hand, but if you cannot do so, then elevate the patient and let it happen naturally.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if it does not reduce on its own, then make the patient lie down and vigorously shake the affected part, and subsequently apply bandages soaked in mucilage.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the birth has occurred, then make her sit on that [seat], and subsequently examine the reduction of the hand, and restore the condition according to its natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command her to squeeze inwardly until it is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Suspension of the testicle on the shoulder with its cords and the fascia extended over the back of the body.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Let the midwife hold the testicle and then gradually roll it to facilitate its movement.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is in place and the appropriate time has come, then apply to the wound what we have recommended of oil and mucilage.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command them to squeeze it gradually little by little, and when you have done this, make them sit on a chair and command them to lean over the right side, and then command them to be compressed; and make them sneeze under certain conditions.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The delivery of the prepared fetus on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you suspend the testicle from the inguinal canal according to this method, examine it, and then incise it with your fingernail until it is evacuated of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of it, then you incise that part of the abdomen, so that it is not retained and dies.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then push the fetus into the parts inside until you reach the second part that is needed, and tell the woman to press herself several times, and it will be quickly delivered if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Outcome of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins usually are born in several stages, and sometimes three or four [births occur], but this is rare and takes a long time; however, these causes are due to nature, not life.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And among those, whether they are multiples, there is a second one, and they are separated by the umbilical cord, distinct from each other through the entire ligament at the navel of each. And sometimes they are delivered in stages as if it were a single fetus naturally quickly, and sometimes they are delivered in stages as we have recounted, which is not commendable.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some of them make childbirth difficult and it reaches the state we have described regarding unnatural figures, then you should treat them as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does what she does with ease and skill, whether promptly or slowly, and acts according to all figures as prepared for the delivery to ensure safety.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Recollection of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarried.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes formations occur at one month, two months, three months, four months, five months, six months, seven months, and rarely ten months, and it should be verified that a woman may miscarry at six months, while another may carry to ten months, the cause of which is established by measurement according to the wise.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And thus it is that a midwife must be in the knowledge of this science, for often it appears to her as such, and therefore she should act upon what is necessary.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the Extraction of a Dead Fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat a dead fetus as we have said in the division of treatment and it does not come out on its own, and you are forced to use surgical intervention, then it is necessary for you to consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and is not subject to any of the accidents that lead to fear of loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Now it is necessary for the woman to be placed on her back on the bed with her buttocks raised and her head lowered.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the attendant should hold her in both parts or tie her to the bed so that her body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you should moisten the mouth of the fetus with oil, honey, and mucus made from alum, fenugreek, and linseed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and mucus, and then gently insert her hand into the fetus, and then search with her hand for the position where the hooks can be placed in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And appropriate places for this are as follows: then you should consider if the fetus is positioned to descend by its head, and now you place the hooks in its hands, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or under the chin, or in the clavicle, or in proper places on the ribs, or under the armpits.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the swelling is on the legs, then apply it to the navel, or to the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And he should hold the bandage in his right hand, and place the curve of it at the point where his left hand's fingers are positioned, and insert the hand with ease so that the bandage is placed in one of those places we have mentioned, until it reaches the swollen area.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And he should place and fix it in such a way that another bandage, or a third if necessary, is applied to provide equal traction, and not simply extension according to its straightness alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And it should be done gently in all parts, so that the swelling is alleviated just as it is done around the area to be treated.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is necessary in this that the extension be softened; and if any part of it is restrained, then the midwife should anoint some of the said substances with oil and insert them carefully and rotate around what is restrained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if a part of the fetus is protruding, then the bandages should be moved to a place that is easier; and do this until all of the fetus is delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if one hand is swollen in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce it by compression, then cloth should be wrapped around it; and subsequently extract it until all of it is delivered, and cut it either at the wrist or at the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do the same for the other hand and both legs.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the swelling of the fetus is large, or if it affects the skull during delivery, or if it occurs in the head of the tightly wrapped umbilical cord, then one must intervene between the spined spatulas and cut open the head to remove the fluid, or use an instrument called “alundat,” the form of which will be among the forms of other instruments described near this chapter.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly if the fetus has a large head by nature: then it must be intervened with some kind of restraint, or taken out using an instrument called “alundat” as we have said; and afterwards extract the bones using forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is delivered and is constricted behind the clavicle, then it must be cut so that the fluid in the membranes can be released.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated and does not obstruct delivery, then you must cut the head as soon as possible according to what seems appropriate to you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the lower part of the abdomen is abscessed or affected by hydrops, then you must pierce it so that the fluid can drain.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the fetus is positioned feet down, then the traction on it is light and the direction towards the mother's mouth is also light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is constricted behind the abdomen and membranes, then you must remove it using a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and cut open the abdomen and membranes so that the fluid can flow out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other limbs are stuck and only the head can be turned, then place your left hand inside; but if the mother's mouth is open, then insert your hand into the fetus’s neck, and search for the head, and pull it out with the fingers, and afterward insert a hook or two hooks, and pull it out with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed by an abscess that occurs on it, then it must not be incised upon it; but rather, at this time apply effusion of moist fatty substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply plasters; and follow with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the abscess is on the side, then at this time, if possible, it should be lanced: and that which we have said about the living fetus should be administered.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And it is necessary that you do not leave any cause inside from the second incision.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all of your operation, then apply that which we have said about the treatment of abscesses that occur on the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs, then bathe in astringent waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman in whose womb was a dead fetus, and right above that focus another pregnancy occurred, and the other focus was a dead fetus.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	An abscess occurred near the navel for a long time; it became swollen and internally inflamed, and began to discharge pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to treat it, and treated it for a long time, but the condition did not improve.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied various strongly adhesive plasters to it, and extracted one bone from it, and after several days, another bone; and I was very amazed, as there were no bones in the abdomen.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Then I thought that they were bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I probed the area and removed some bones from it, which were located in her thighs. After doing this for a long time, I noticed that one of her arms had improved.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not find it strange, since in this lies the science and assistance for what the physician uses his hands to administer treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of instruments that are necessary to remove the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Shape of a spiral in which the main one is used:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the shape of a forceps with which he grips the limbs; at each end of the two branches, there are spirals.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this spiral should be finer than a needle and should be made of ivory or the wood of a tree.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each branch should be two fingers, and the thickness of each at both ends should be one finger, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle of the two branches are two adjustments made of the same material as the branches, whose length is half a palm plus a little more, and the width of each is two fingers or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two adjustments should be inserted into the mouth of the main part so that they are engaged when you rotate the prescribed spirals.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another similar shape, but finer and more delicate:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Here is the translation:
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the end of the membrane to which additions are made in this way as often as necessary, and the length of those additions is one palm each, and the width of each is two of these.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open that one of them, then you should have the woman lie on her back with her legs hanging down, which is between the thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument in this way as you do with scissors equally according to the quantity that you want from the size of the opening of the passage until the sound is what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of whirlpool which the ancients described:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of impelling with which the substance is pushed out:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of connection with which the large part is contained
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps at whose end there are teeth as often as necessary, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as often as necessary, at whose end there are teeth like those of a reed with which it is cut and held.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of connection for a few:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a hook having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a hook having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps at whose end there are teeth with which the head of the fetus is held:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a spatum having two ends at which the head is divided:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	Those instruments are exercised in such ways, and when their varieties are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, it becomes easier for them to perform their operations and they should be made according to the quantity needed for people.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you should not refrain from preparing any of those instruments, wherever they may be needed, for the necessity of them is inexcusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of the extraction of the second one.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second birth is retained during childbirth, you should command the woman to hold her breath, and then induce her to sneeze under certain conditions. Place your hand over her mouth and nose, and if it causes expulsion by this method, that is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a mixture and pierce its cover with a hole, placing it near the mouth of the mother along with remedies such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, Arabian scammony, cinnamon bark, and saffron.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All of these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the mixture, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a reed tube in the mouth of the mother, and keep it there until the vapor reaches the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then induce her to sneeze as we have said, and the second birth will be expelled quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this treatment is delayed and it does not work, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or almond butter, and then insert it into the vagina to search for the second birth. When you find it, take it out gradually piece by piece. If it is attached to the membrane of the mother, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you find the second birth, extract it little by little so that the mother does not suffer from violent attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Take care that it is turned to the right and left with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And it should be adjusted in the amount of attraction, for it will obey and avoid adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed, we have already recommended treatment through sneezing and medication of the wound with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not expelled by all the causes we have recommended, then you must guard against overworking on that account through iteration of abstention. Rather, ensure that what has been ejected from the mouth of the mother lies near to the woman's body, and afterward crumple it up into a small mass and tetrapharmacon; for this will cause it to dry up within a few days and it will be dissolved and expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it dries up, it is raised to the head and to the stomach, and this gives you the illness; then it is necessary that sublimations and appropriate remedies be administered for this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients already used sublimation of nitrated tartar and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of an instrument with which the woman is subjected to sublimation due to the retention of menstruation and secondary conditions:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of wood or ivory.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the fine end should be placed in the vagina and the wider end above the fire, and the sublimation should be placed on the coals of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep that instrument inside until the sublimation is consumed, then repeat with another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of the treatment of the unopened anus of a child.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many children are born with their anuses not open, which is small, closed up.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then it is necessary for the midwife to carefully open that small closure with her finger; and if not, she should use a sharp probe to do so, taking care not to touch the membrane.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then apply poultices made of boiled wool with oil; and subsequently treat that area until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it is obstructed, then insert a cannula for several days, and remove it when the child needs to pass gas.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And sometimes the anus becomes obstructed due to the consolidation of an abscess or swelling; then it is necessary to incise that consolidation, and afterwards treat it as we have said regarding treatment and lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of the treatment of fistulas that occur nearby.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that occur in the lower part near the anus are usually small and thick, which appear close to the anus or on one side.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is either one fistula or multiple.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And as that small area becomes old and drains watery white pus or subtle purulence, sometimes these fistulas penetrate deeper.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And these penetrating ones are known by what is expressed from them through excretion and gas formation; and sometimes there is an obstruction in excretion, and it easily indicates the nature of these issues.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	Of those fistulas some extend into the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the shaft of the penis; and of those penetrating into the joint of the thigh and into the root of the genitals.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in which the penetrating and non-penetrating fistula is known, you should insert your finger into the anus, and insert a fine probe of horn or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is tortuosity in that, now insert a fine probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair with your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel any of this nor proceed with the treatment for any cause of evacuation such as worms or flatulence, as we have said, then you know that it is non-penetrating, and now apply yourself to its cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the shaft of the penis, then the significance of it is that urine comes from there, and the prohibition is such that the site must be healed by medical treatment.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and there is pain in the circumference, then the sign of it is that the probe passes through here if there is no tortuosity within the bone, and there is pain in the circumference of the affected area; and you will have an abscess permanently; and treatment with medication does not work there, nor is it healed by application.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the treatment for these is the labor and effort of skilled physicians upon which it depends.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing by iron is hoped for as I will tell you, and this is what I and my predecessors have done.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is when the patient lies between your hands, raise his sides and place him so that things are inclined towards his belly, and then insert a probe of lead or iron if it is in an ulcerated tortuosity, until you know where the probe passes.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if it is there that the patient feels pain around the anus, then you should insert your finger into the anus.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel with your finger that the probe has already penetrated by itself, or what you feel between your finger and that sinus or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that one, because there is no healing in that, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some might say that it heals in some men slowly.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the treatment by which hope is placed in him, you should make a subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as has been described, and insert that heated instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those inflamed tissues adjacent to the fistula are hardened, like the quill of a bird.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then treat that with bandages soaked in butter until all those hardened tissues heal, and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh. If it heals, that is good; but if not, then it will not heal at any time by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters and does not penetrate inside; you say which is in the anus, and between that and the probe there is a membrane of flesh or of leather, and sometimes the fistula is on that which lies on the surface of the buttocks, then the buttock dries up from the beginning of the fistula, and you see drying up both the probe, and it should be in the fistula inside until the drying reaches the place where the extremity of the probe passes, and through the probe it is freed and cured.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then cleanse those fleshy parts that are gathered like the tube of a bird's feather quill and do not leave any part without cleansing it of any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if blood flows when you are examining those fleshy parts during your operation, then the thread and the pus can be cauterized with fire or with sharp medicine, for cauterizing with fire adjusts two good habits: one is the adjustment of the flesh that has been conjoined, and the other is the absorption of blood by drying up the humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then treat it with bandages wrapped in boiled leather or in soft cloth until the area gets better, and afterwards treat the wound with hard flesh remedies that generate and consolidate.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And medicines in which there is astringency and drying; when these are restored, it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula already extends inside the anal region and is long from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it with that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore, if you feel the probe and between it and your finger there is a membrane of leather or flesh, and it resists penetration, then at that time there is no operation to be performed but rather proceed according to trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to be addressed in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry it until you achieve the condition where it is possible for you to introduce certain instruments and proper treatment; do not proceed with drying if doing so might injure the muscle containing the bowel, and do this under anesthesia without the patient's voluntary movement; then treat that wound with what we have said because it will heal quickly; or lengthen that flap and clean that pus which you dried inside near the anus as we have said, either by hand or by another sharp instrument, and subsequently cleanse those ulcerated tissues which appear in the drying section through perforation; then strive to restore the entire wound through drying, and if the upper pus opening has not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the buttock area, it will be easier for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is treated in this way: it is when you introduce the probe into the fistula, and it lies beneath the surface of the body around the circumference of the anus and at the margin of the buttocks, then take a perforated tip, which is like a needle prepared in this manner:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert it into that faithful wrapping of five threads or around them; then introduce the probe with the thread into the fistula until you achieve the condition where it is possible for you to proceed.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates the margin of the buttocks near inside, then you extract the thread from that spot as though you were inserting your finger into the anus; and pull out the end of the thread and tie both ends together, and tighten them, and leave this for one day or two, and when you cut the thread in the flesh, tightly close it so that those tissues between the two ends of the thread heal.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Regarding the treatment of internal wounds, until they are healed and strengthened.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the openings of the fistula are not penetrable, now make them penetrate, in whatever way you have prepared it, but do not move it from its position, for it is not up to you to do this so as not to injure the rectum; and then proceed with that until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatum with barbs used to incise the fistula: its curvature is sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, so as not to injure what is unnecessary, as often happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Regarding the suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows during their incision.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids occur in two ways: either they appear around the anus like coal pieces, or they are soft and resemble grape bunches.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And they can be small or large, and the blood flows from them continuously and is one type, and multiple, and outside the anus, and at its extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are outside the anus are due to little moisture, from which flows a small amount of yellowish water or blood continuously, and their color is like the color of the skin.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit down and apply pressure until the anus opens and the hemorrhoids become visible to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you proceed carefully and suspend them with hooks or what you have available, and then incise them along their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the hooks do not hold in those places because of their humidity and softness, then take a rough cloth or a cord or flaxen bandage, extract them with these tools mentioned, and subsequently incise around them and sprinkle certain powders near the incision, so that they serve as cauterization; or cauterize them as was described in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And subsequently treat them with other methods until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the pus does not flow out, then incise the abscess with an incision that is small and it should be washed with water which facilitates easy evacuation when the pus is expressed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is easier to address, and you should take them with your finger or hook, and incise them, and subsequently treat them as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for those who require suturing, proceed in the following manner: take silk wrapped around a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids at the upper part, and make the thread pass through the opposite side with the needle, wrap both ends of the silk below the needle horizontally; tighten the hemorrhoid firmly, and then tie off the silk and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this for all of them, leaving one unsewn so that the excess blood can flow from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place over the anus a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax; and put that on the affected area and instruct the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	This is from within that which enters the cavity; and when it is enclosed, treat those things with what one finds or with another treatment until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the Treatment of Fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Frequently, accidents occur due to the splitting of a fissure or constriction by nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they are old and do not respond to that medicine, then you should scrape those areas with the edge of a spatula or your fingernail until they become moist and discharge pus from them, which prevents consolidation; and subsequently treat them until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Now you should scrape those areas with more vigorous pus discharge until some bleeding occurs and they are inflamed; and subsequently treat them until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the Treatment of Hemorrhoids, Which Is a Key Topic.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that alamermar, which is key, and it is nothing but red spots according to the color of the skin, similar to the head of a nail, and it appears all over the body but mostly below the waist and in those areas, and from these you feel pain.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Then it is necessary to incise what is in the area around the spot, and hold it with pliers or tweezers, and eradicate it from its root; and subsequently treat that area.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the affected area as described in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	But warts are small, hard, rough, round elevations on the surface of the skin, and they frequently occur in most children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	Of the treatment of the urethra, which is extended and incised there, one should use a thread or hair tied within it to close.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And now the excrescences, both inverted and not inverted, are eradicated with the instrument of which I have spoken.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	A mole is a small raised or puffed swelling on the surface of the body that itches, and when scratched it becomes painful like an ant bite, and it forms around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The treatment for this is to take a needle of eagle feather or vulture feather, and it should be strong, and place that on the mole so that it covers the circle of the needle from all sides; then rotate your hand with the needle until you incise what is in the circuit of the mole, and place it in the flesh of the itch, and remove the mole from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a needle of iron or of metal in this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the upper part of the needle be drawn with subtlety, blunt (that is not perforated), wrapped in such a way that when held by the finger, its movement and rotation are controlled.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the mole as mentioned before in the chapter on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of the forms of the instruments that you administer to patients.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some cups are made of silver or lead or molten or hammered metal; and some cups are made of those instruments small and large according to those to whom they are administered, for the one who is treated in the cure of small children should be small; and for those whose anuses are narrow or painful, the cups of those should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of the large and few cup:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The top of the tube of leather above which the bag is tied should be wide according to this manner; and it should be at the place where the bag is tied as you see.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of the tube below, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (that is, not open) like a lion's tail, made fine; and on one side of it there are two flaps, and on the other side one flap, and the width of the flap should be according to the thickness of the rays and slightly thicker.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines are placed should be made of animal bladder or sheepskin, and the length of the tube should be one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be perforated with threads as it is rolled; and if the space between the threads is as thick as a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those threads strong vinegar from raw honey, or around them; and adjust the bag tightly at that point; and when the bag is placed on it, it should be tight at the top of the cup between two distinct strong bindings, and then seal each thread: But the quality of sealing there is that you fill the bag with medicine according to the quantity that the patient can tolerate; and be careful not to make it too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Let the patient lie on their back, and raise their buttocks with something under them like a cushion or a folded cloth; then anoint the tip of the cauterizing instrument with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or something similar; then gently insert that into the anus with ease; then the assistant takes the bag and squeezes it strongly inside until everything in the rectum is evacuated; then remove the instrument and the patient lowers their buttocks to the bed.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine causes it to be expelled immediately, let it remain as much as possible; and if it sleeps in it throughout one night, it is better for healing.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you treat that with rectal treatments for abdominal diseases and their expulsion, then you repeat the treatment until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a very soft and fine rectal tube, like those used for children's enemas.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the treatment of plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already said in the section on the treatment of plagues what was appropriate for the book, and I will now describe the treatment of those with medicine according to the completion.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that plagues are diverse according to what causes the plagues and according to the location where the plague occurs.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which plagues occur are such as stone retention, or cutting by a sword or knife, or striking with a spear, or with a stick, or with an arrow, or similar to those from various causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Here are the plagues that are in the parts of the body such as the plague which affects the head, the neck, the feet, the belly, the groin, and similar ones in the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I also recommend the treatment of certain plagues, so that you pause that reasoning and rule regarding other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple plagues of the head, for the recollection of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, I say that when you encounter a simple plague in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a blow from a stone or similar object, and if it has only bruised the bone but caused a large swelling and you fear that there may be an abscess underneath, then immediately examine and perform phlebotomy on the cephalic vein without delay; do not postpone this unless there is some prohibiting cause for phlebotomy, especially if little blood comes out of the wound.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And let the phlebotomy be performed on the opposite side of the affected part; and protect the patient from overeating and from heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some reason prevents you from performing phlebotomy, then reduce the patient's food intake and do not allow meat or heavy foods.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause treatment on the plague if an abscess forms underneath; then apply only rose oil or in a liquid that has been stypticated.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if you are certain of an abscess underneath, then pause treatment on the plague if it is still fresh and the blood and air have not changed the powder that I recommend to apply shortly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, pause at certain intervals until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	And if the wound is large or due to a fracture and the lips of it cannot be approximated, then approximate those with stitches as I will describe regarding the stitching of them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	And if the wound is already exposed to the bone and flesh, and there is no need to retain it except for a small suspensorium, then incise it and treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in place of stitches, and command the patient to be nourished on foods that are nutritious: such as meat, eggs, and similar items until he recovers.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find in the wound putrefaction and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all that is purulent and remove it, and subsequently treat it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	And if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding could occur, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then you should inquire about the condition of the artery. If you find that it has not been cut, then you should cut it with a scalpel or ligate it; and if necessity compels you to do something different from what we have said, then you should cauterize until the bleeding is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, the cause of them is minor. Therefore, you can powder those with this powder, as it will consolidate them before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of the powder is as follows: take oil of sesame one part, dragon's blood two parts, and burnt frankincense three parts; mix them thoroughly and sift. Apply this to fill the wound, and bind it tightly so that it adheres well to the wound, and let it coagulate with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And bind tightly above the poultice that which is below it and leave it bound until such time as it is not inflamed, for medicine does not reach it while it remains unsanated.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes this cure is used when the presence of enses and dragon's blood is not available.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this method of operation is used for large wounds when it is necessary to place them in a compressed state and to treat fresh wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially during summer times, then do not apply this powder directly to these wounds. Instead, treat them as we have said, placing some cooling digestive herbs on them, or applying flour poultices mixed with water and honey until they begin to rot; and afterward, cure them with the other method until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if the wound involves a small bone fracture, then you should treat it with herbs.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I shall describe the treatment of skull fractures in what follows.
De las plaguas del col.	Of wounds to the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment compared to a simple head wound.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve of the neck is severed or an artery is injured, then if it is a nerve, do not use any cooling agent but avoid treatment with anything that strongly constricts, such as zinc ore and similar substances that harm the nerves and contract them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	Do not pause on any cause of trembling, for the substance of the nerves is trembling and their continuity ends at the brain, which is the source of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if he is to be treated with gentle medicines, such as being washed with warm water, sometimes infused in rosin oil or non-resin oil, and then wrapped when washed with warm water along with other mineral preparations according to this method, and find moisture.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the condition is severe, then administer stitches, or close its lips, and afterwards treat it with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound is deep or there is corruption at its lowest part, then pierce that area in the most depressed location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if an artery is already cut and bleeding occurs, then ligate or cauterize that artery, or tie it off, if necessity prompts you to do so.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you have already cut the vertebrae of the neck or completely, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you should approximate the edges of the wound with sutures above the bone of the neck and do not touch it; instead, equalize that area and reduce it to its natural position, and afterwards strengthen it with proper support, and leave it for several days; and afterwards treat it with dressings that have astringent and excitatory properties until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has already penetrated into the bone, then probe that area, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those you can; and what is not within your capability, leave until the wound becomes pus-filled, and let it separate so that the swelling subsides.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle over it the powder which has been recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if a fistula has formed in the wound, then treat it with the liquid whose description will be found in its appropriate chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of wounds to the neck or similar ones that are made between the shoulders, whether with a sword, knife, lance, or similar weapon.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a thrust from a lance or knife, and if you examine its depth, then consider whether there is swelling when the wound festers; at that time, you will know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth to it and the wound is fresh with its own blood, then at that first hour apply powder, and do not press on it so as not to retain the blood in its depths and cause harm, but rather apply a drawing agent, and leave it uncovered for two days.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the drawing agent is not available to you, then place a piece of cloth on the wound opening so that it absorbs any moisture; and have the patient lie on the wound so that the fluid within can drain.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have already passed since the wound was inflicted and no spasms, tremors of the heart, or constriction of the breath has occurred, and you see other good signs in it, then you will know that the wound is safe; and then treat it with bandages and appropriate care until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if healing of it is unnecessary and the area has remained open for some time, then you will know that a fistula has formed; treat it therefore according to its chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is from a knife or a sword, and it is simple on the surface of the skin or flesh, then treat it as would be done before stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if it has already affected the bone, and some of the severed pieces are loose, then you should turn the wound to try to extract those pieces, if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separate, then leave them inside until the wound heals, as their extraction would be difficult.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other wounds in the other limbs, the treatment in healing is as we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the wounds of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The injury that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, slight, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	In severe cases, one may injure the bowel or its nerve, because there is greater risk of penetration and the suturing must be more vigorous and more precise.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is difficult to repair by other means, and it should be noted that the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not immediately return them to their proper place, as they swell and become enlarged, making the instrument difficult to use.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore, the best disruption is moderate, because in that case it is not difficult to reduce the bowel, nor is it too difficult as in the two previous cases mentioned.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you should know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two types of sutures are common and suitable for suturing other wounds of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	Of two other sutures proper communicate with other wounds, but however more properly in the suture of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you each exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Then I say that when the wound is small and it becomes compressed by some cause of the bowel through that, and it becomes difficult to reduce it, there are two ways this can happen: either due to the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when the bowel has become inflated due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And then when that is so, it is necessary for you to warm it in such a way that you immerse a sponge or cloth soaked in lukewarm water alone, or steeped in hot water with cyperus and spica, and apply it to the bowel until the inflation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes I do this with those in whom there is spasm, and it is better than water alone for resolving the inflation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see the inflation resolved, then you moisten the bowel with water in which rue and mallows have been steeped, for by this the irritation of it is alleviated slightly.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the irritation of it is excused near this treatment, then divide the rupture slightly with an instrument with which hemorrhoids are incised.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better, when it is appropriate that there be no cutting, and there should be no need to dry it out near necessity and deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, this is its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the sharp edge of the probe, and the other part not sharp, and the tip fine, but not as fine as a needle, rather slightly blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And thus when the wound is enlarged and the edges are separated from the belly, now it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible over that, for that is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the abdomen, now it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and place his arms further away than his head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you place his head and feet further out than the sides.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two sides of the abdomen, now you must constantly direct your attention and consideration so that the part where the wound is lies further out than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And so you must administer this in both large wounds and medium-sized wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, prepare what is needed, and then have the most skilled among you perform it, who should hold the wound entirely with their hand and adjust the lips of it, and then proceed to suture it for some reason or another.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or an equivalent to a needle according to the quantity and amplitude of the wound; then place the end of the suture from the tip of the ring finger, and tighten the needle once, ensuring that you do not insert thread at both ends of the stitch, but rather between the two ends of the tissue on either side of the wound; and as soon as you have joined both ends of the suture and both ends of the cleft, it makes four stitches.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	E around the needle tie a double thread in a circle, and some stitches on both sides upwards, and then bring together the two lips of the wound and close it decently; and then lay aside the thickness of the finger and place another needle there, and then tie that as firmly as you tied the first needle; and do not cease doing this if necessary with the needles until you have completed all the stitching of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of medium fineness between coarseness and subtlety, for fine needles penetrate the flesh too quickly; and thick ones are difficult to insert in the tendon, and therefore it is fitting that they be of medium fineness and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not fitting for the needle to be placed at both ends of the tendon too close together, so that the flesh is not penetrated quickly and the wound does not separate before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not extend the stitches too far apart so that the wound is not hindered from consolidating.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not bother the patient while sleeping; and place over the stitches pads expanded from all sides, which should cover the ends of the needles; and leave them in place until you know that the wound has already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And this type of stitching with needles is most convenient for small wounds, as you often need only one or two needles or around that number.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second type of stitching is common: it is that you manage in one go the four extremities, of the tendon and two ends of the skin, with a needle which is properly wrapped in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	When the needle has penetrated these four extremities, withdraw the needle from that middle part from which you began, so that the thread exits at the most prominent part of the wound, so that the suture is a cloth-like stitch in which the threads are tightly drawn.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture by the width of the smallest finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known to the people.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And in such a suture, I sewed the wound that was caused to a man in his abdomen with a knife, and the rupture of the wound was more than one palm wide, and it was situated around two palms from the midgut and the disruption was at the midpoint of the limb; then I reduced it after the gut had protruded from the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound healed within fifteen days or thereabouts, and he was treated and recovered; afterwards he walked with crutches for some time, and then returned to his usual condition.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that he could not be healed; and by miracle of fire, for I did not treat him with any ointment, since it was in a place where no ointment or medicine was available, but I placed a knife twice daily on the wound and washed it frequently with honey water until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will describe two types of suture according to the narration of the Text.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin the suture from the outer part and then pass the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so when the needle penetrates into the bone and in that place tie knots according to straightness and length of the entire body, and leave the extremity of the suture in which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from the inside part to the outside part at the other extremity of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that penetration, then make another penetration in that same extremity of the wound from the outside to the inside; and leave the extremity of the suture that is in this knot, and make the needle penetrate at the other extremity from the inside to the outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make your penetration such that when you penetrate into the suture at the extremity of the wound, which is in the part inside so that all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then start from this side and proceed to the other side at the extremity where the suture is in the other knot, and withdraw the needle from the bone that it penetrates, and then reinsert it into that bone with the extremity of the suture that is on the other side at this extremity of the wound; and withdraw it from the bone that is on this side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this one side and then the other, and do this one stitch after another until you sew up everything that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the purpose of this method of suturing is that you sew with a suture thread as if sewing skins together; thus, you sew the suture once from the side of the bone extremity, and leave it for another stitch until it is completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Here is the translation:
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Place the needle at the end closer to you of the wound, and make it penetrate inside the wound through one point, and cut off both ends of the thread; then turn the needle and make it exit from inside out through both ends of the thread.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then turn each one of them around and make each one penetrate from the inner part of the wound to the outer part through both ends of another point on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suturing is better than the common simple suturing, and it is the type of suture about which I have previously mentioned.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And if someone says that the suturing of the abdomen is done with two needles, it means that you insert a thread into each one and begin by inserting one needle on your side according to the stitch, and make it penetrate into the opposite side as you would when缝合身体其他部位。
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you should know that when there is disruption in the middle part of the abdomen, the suturing of it is more difficult than that of other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the judgment in the treatment of wounds is the same as for other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The reason is that when you manage to treat the recent wound with its blood before the air alters it, and reduce the swelling and clean it properly, then apply powder to it.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply some ingredients that harden and close the wound, and make the thread and needle firm; then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have the medicines at hand, then wait for a short while, because it begins to form pus, and change that twice daily, as I teach you, until it is healed, so that you may not need another medication in many dispositions when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the wound may communicate to the main limbs, then wrap a piece of linen in high-quality oil or in rose oil, and place it around the areas between the joints and apply them as such.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in the bladder, as this often happens, then use black styptic tebe, and especially if the putrefaction has reached the bladder and an abscess has formed within it.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that what is of the large bladder heals more slowly than what is in the small bladders.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because the bladder called “gegunu” does not easily recover from wounds that occur there; and this is due to the great number of veins within it, its large size, the subtlety of its structure, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what proceeds from the wound is tissue, and you obtain that which is fresh, reduce it as you would with equal care to how you reduce bladders.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed into the space and is already turned green or black, then when you apply hot iron to the area that is discolored, so that blood flows, because in the tissue there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Here is the translation:
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the afflictions that occur in the bowel.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a disruption occurs in the bowel and it is small, it is sometimes possible to repair it in some people, because I saw one who had been afflicted in his belly by the thrust of a lance, and the affliction was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had formed a fistula, and there was discharge from the wound and gas.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I bandaged the wound whether or not I was confident in its healing, but I attempted to stimulate that part which would heal and where the area would be strengthened.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And when I saw the area already healed, I guarded against any harm that might come from the bad event in his belly; and no one suffered any harm from this evil accident by changing their food and drink habits, and soon they were bathing and exercising as usual.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced people say that when there is a small affliction in the bowel, it should be treated as follows: take ants with large heads; then bring together the edges of the wound and place one of those ants, which has its mouth open, on the edges of the wound; thus, when it bites onto them and holds tight, cut off its head because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another ant next to the first one, and do not stop this until you have placed ants one after another according to the quantity of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that and close the wound; and let those heads remain in the bowel until the bowel is healed; and no harm will come to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	It is possible that the ligature be made with a fine thread from the same intestine of an animal as it is used for sewing; and you should take the extremity of this thread of gut, which must be stripped of its outer skin, and join the end to the thread of the ligature, wrapped around, and then pass that thread through needles and attach it to the ligature, and reduce it at the point of dissection.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of stitching with ants is nothing but a second means of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the fine intestines, for then there can be only a partial healing, and not complete restoration of it.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that every wound and swelling when it suppurates and becomes old, and forms an ulcer, and is not consolidated and continues to discharge for a long time without being excised, whether in any part of the body, is universally called a fistula, and we call it that kind of abscess.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And truly a fistula is a felted node, hard and white, at which there is no pain but which itches like the itch of bird's mites; and for this reason it is called that kind of rash, that is, an itching affliction.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in some people a moist condition, which discharges constantly; and the moisture is easily excised within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And at times this moisture is thick, and it is little, and it is coarse, and it is fine.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	This has been said in the division, that whenever I discuss wounds, every ulcer that is not healed nor is on bare flesh, is due to one of these causes: one of which is either because of a lack of healing power in the body; or because it is harmful by nature; or because between it and the surrounding tissue there is hard skin preventing the growth of new flesh; or because it is caused by an unsuitable substance; or because that ulcer itself contains pus and the matter conveyed to it is of poor quality; or because the medicine used for its cure is inappropriate; or when corruption sets in the area, and it becomes pestilential; or due to the nature of the place, such as Saragossa, where the digestion of illnesses is difficult, and the healing of abscesses is delayed by nature; or because there is bone within it, or several bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have shown all those causes, and the signs of them, and the cure for each with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is appropriate that I tell you about the treatment of a fistula, which is done through an operation with my hands.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; among them are fistulas that affect major veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spleen, or the bowels, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the back, or one of the complex joints such as those of the hand and foot; and some of these are near to the main part of the limb and similar.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore, among these fistulas that follow this method, there are diseases difficult to heal, and they do not easily receive a cure, and the treatment of them requires labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if any of the fistulas has a depth which does not reach the places mentioned above, and you hope and trust in its cure, and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula runs straight ahead, explore it with that.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	And if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of lead, for the lightness of lead causes it to float and curve around the tortuosity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has openings that are frightening, it is not within your power to signify upon them with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then anoint the openings through the openings, for the moisture with which you anoint it will go to the other openings and flow from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire very carefully, according to the method by which you can know whether here there is bone or nerve, and whether the depth of the fistula is far or near, or if it is a fistula with all its openings lying on top of everything at the limit of your strength, of your thorough inquiry, of which you inquire about the disease, and the cause of the pain lies under your compression upon the place, and similar signs and accidental causes to the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood upon all those causes with true judgment, then proceed to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider now whether it is a fistula that is apparent, near, or in a salt place, far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I have told you about.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Now you dry the fistula according to what was said before about its description, and remove what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what has grown in the opening of the flesh or tissue and similar parts, and treat it until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of great depth and runs straight, you should incise it to the primary wound as far as possible, and then remove all the corrupted flesh; afterwards apply bandages wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have prepared with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this several times so that the sharp medicine dissolves all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then treat it with applications that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it does not heal with this treatment, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must determine this, then you should investigate it and dry it out as we have recommended, without prohibiting any cause related to veins or nerves or a major limb as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness on it, then you should excise that until all the corruption is removed; afterwards treat it with what promotes flesh growth until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it does not heal and pus continues to discharge as before, then you will know that you have not fully eradicated the corruption; then uncover it again and carefully examine and clean it thoroughly with the strongest means available, and afterwards treat it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it heals, that is good; but if not, then you will know that the corruption is in the deep parts of the body, which have not been reached, and then in that case all that remains is to lay open the area.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, you can remove it; then you pull it out with fine forceps, which are suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then carefully remove all of them, and do not leave any behind for any reason due to your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if any cause of moisture opposes you, and there is no fear or error in their incision, then incise those ligaments or muscles if necessary, and release the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you do not have the preparation to remove the bones at that time, then apply what can alleviate the inflammation to the wound, and leave it as it is until the next time when there is flesh and ligaments around those bones, and guard against the wound consolidating, and ensure that the section you incised during your operation does not become constricted.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having said that, if you are concerned, apply to the wound a cloth submerged in hot oil with honey, or a cloth submerged in Egyptian ointment, or any of the green ointments, because when those ligaments need to be relaxed, and the bones are separated from them, and their attraction is eased.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone such as the bone of a camel or cow or similar, and only the surface of that bone is corrupted, then scrape off that part with resistance only behind until that blackness and corruption is removed, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if the part that is corrupted is large, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close off that area and completely incise within the place where the corruption has spread, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	Here is what is recommended to you concerning what happens when attending to a person in their condition so that you may use this as an example and assistance for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man around xxx years old experienced pain in his body, and the part inside him was affected by an internal condition where matter has reached the area causing it to become severely abscessed, and this is not due to an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	Then the condition extended over time due to the error of the physicians, causing the abscess to become hard and filled with pus, and his cure was delayed until an opening was made in the swelling, through which all the putrid matter and moisture from the body were discharged.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	Then the patient was treated by many physicians for two years, and none of them had knowledge or skill in the art until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	I saw the swelling on him and the matter that was running from those openings in large amounts; his body was completely emaciated, and his complexion was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	Then I inserted the probe into one of those openings and it reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then I promptly examined all the openings and found that they reached throughout all parts of the swelling.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	Then I decided to incise over one of the openings where I could expose part of the bone, and I found it corrupted; it was already reduced to dust and decayed. Part of the swelling had penetrated into the marrow and was also corrupted.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I used what was shown to me and prepared from the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I cut out what was not bone but that corruption which I had already diagnosed and prepared to remove.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I paused the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it did not heal.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I re-opened and exposed the bone again beyond the initial exposure, and found continued corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I treated what appeared to be that corruption, and then I was forced to perform the cure of it and its restoration, and it did not restore.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I exposed another area and did not stop from cutting away the bone little by little specifically to restore it, and it did not heal until I cut around one palm's width of it, including its marrow, and afterward I restored that with medicines, and it healed quickly and was cured.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to repeat the operation and cutting of it except for the condition of its fever and the lack of tolerance of it and its fear of death, because it was affected at all hours by excessive evacuation of syncope malaise.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus he is fully healed, and there is no soft flesh in the place of bone; his condition improved in his body, and his vitality returned; and he recovered to his original state and did not experience contrary effects during movement or harm from any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if there is an elevated bone in the place of the injured body, then you should proceed as follows: take a thread and tie it at the end of that prominent bone, and instruct someone to stretch that part; pause with a thicker piece of wool after the first thread; then wrap the thread over the flesh near the bone, and extend the extremity so that you pull the flesh apart, thus exposing the skin where you wish to suture so that the sutures do not cut into the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	Place a cushion or board under the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not prohibited to saw through the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	You should saw over the corrupted place little by little, for if it is in the concavity of the bone where corruption and not appearance are evident, and perhaps you may need to锯过另一侧。由于之前的句子在翻译到“serratura de lu autra veguada”时似乎出现了中断，完整翻译应该是：
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, join one piece continuously to the other, and the corruption is in the middle or part of it; then you uncover all parts entirely; and immediately apply a bandage below, and immediately suture that from the first part where is the corruption until it is continuous with the suturing of the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the suture be according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and suture the bone where it is continuous with the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then it is not within reason but is problematic.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the center of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you must inquire into the nature of the corruption as it appears to you, and you should open that area, and cleanse that according to each possible disposition, and in every case where there is a problem, you should correct it for yourself, when no vital veins or nerves are encountered.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know which incision tools and saws are suitable for cutting these bones, as they vary according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, their fineness and size, their hardness, and their rarity; therefore, it is necessary that you prepare appropriate instruments for each type of operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you should know that this operation implies the need for the specific tool of which you require; when you have great study and long experience in the methods of this art, and evidence from various illnesses, then at that time you will yourself possess what is appropriate to use the instruments for every illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	Here is the translation:
Forma de serra:	Shape of the saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Shape of a large saw:
Forma de ray:	Shape of a reamer:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this reamer be in the shape of the head of a star-shaped key, and let its points be in the form of the steps of a staircase.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not convenient to use them unless the heads of the joints are rubbed when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is large and wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of a larger razor than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Shape of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of a broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Shape of another well-made saw: let it be made with the most durable part of the iron for the teeth, and the handle of horn or wood properly made.
Forma de lu:	Shape of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of a razor with a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Shape of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of another razor with a curved tip:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of a small razor resembling a tenta (tento):
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of a bone cutter used to cut bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of a smaller incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisor; this resembles a nail, and the tip of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in various places according to the ratio of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a nail which is suitable according to the ratio of those bones that are to be penetrated:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the tip of it is triangular and has a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly all the reasons we have mentioned for knives, incisors, and saws apply.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Regarding the incision of extremities and the cutting of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	Extremities may need to be amputated either for an intrinsic cause or for an extrinsic cause, or if you have treated that corruption with the cure of those medicines and the treatment does not succeed, or sometimes the corruption spreads from a member without any reason; then it is necessary to incise that member up to where the corruption reaches, so that the patient may be saved from death or malice, which is a greater harm to the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of the one to whom it happens is that the member becomes black as if burned by fire, or the corruption spreads near the blackness until the infection reaches that member and affects the whole body. And then you should perform an incision on that part.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if the cause of the corruption is a venomous sting from certain causes such as a scorpion, viper, or similar creatures.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or percussion is at the extremity of the finger, then you should cut off the finger and not give space for the corruption to go into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if it reaches the hand, then you should cut at the joint of the wrist, and do not give space for the corruption to enter beyond the joint of the elbow.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if it spreads from there, then you should cut the arm at the shoulder joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes beyond that and reaches around the shoulder, then in that case it is fatal for the patient; and to administer another remedy at that point would be in vain, as the amount of help available is limited.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly do for the foot when corruption spreads to the toe; then you should cut it at one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it reaches the sole of the foot, then you should cut off the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it spreads to the toenail, then you should cut the toe at the joint of the toenail.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread beyond the toenail, then there is no remedy but to leave the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of cutting off a limb or tying it is that you should bind one ligature below the part where you wish to cut, and place another ligature above the location; and extend one ligature to the lower parts, and have another extended to the upper parts; then separate the flesh which lies between two ligatures by about a span until all the flesh is exposed; and it should be cut or tied off accordingly.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	Place a cloth over the patient from all sides so that it does not touch the affected area, and apply to the diseased part an ointment and cauterization.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If bleeding occurs while you are working, immediately cauterize the area, or apply powders to arrest the blood flow; and then return to your treatment once it has stopped.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the affected limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you what happened to a man in his house, which was an accident that I and you have recommended, the kind that suddenly affects him with discoloration on his body as if it were burnt by fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption suddenly begins in his finger and then tends to spread over the entire body.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared for his own death because he feared that the treatment would lead to the limb being amputated due to the intensity of the pain and discoloration, and so he decided to sever the leg at the joint, and thus it was healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	That sudden corruption then occurred in the thumb of his right hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then he came to me, and I applied what was necessary from the medicines to remove that excess for him, along with the purification of his body; but the excess did not respond as expected and began to spread to the other fingers starting from the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asked me to amputate his hand, but I refused to do so, hoping for a response from that excess, and fearing that the amputation of his hand would lead to death, as the patient's condition was very serious.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	Of the pus that comes out of me, it returns to its source, and I perceive that the man prepares and incises his wound entirely, and he is healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have adhered to this narration only because it may assist in understanding the nature of this illness, and what its significance is, according to which it is described and acted upon.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids and the quality of enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged internally so that there is a collection of pus, and then it breaks and perforates, allowing the pus to be discharged, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel, and the membrane above it remains thin like cloth, without having reached putrefaction, nor has it affected the bone or nerves or tendons, it is called a hemorrhoid, and it is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged internally so that putrefaction affects some member, it is then called a fistula and not a hemorrhoid.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The treatment for it is to incise that membrane completely as it revolves, and especially when it is thin like cloth, and ensure that you do not adhere to the place due to its putrefaction.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	However, if you expect the membrane to adhere and that the putrefaction has not reached advanced stages, and there is pus present in the membrane, then you should treat it with enemas.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And when you consider the hemorrhoid, if it is large and the limb you are treating has a foul odor, then you should administer an Egyptian medicine as an enema. This medicine consists of oil, vinegar, and camphor in equal parts, which are mixed in a vessel and heated over fire until the mixture becomes thick like honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Take the water that is necessary and dissolve in it honey and water; and administer a cleansing enema with it, and strain the opening of it, and leave the medicine inside for the quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	Then extract it in that manner; and do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the pus is removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is administered with water of ashes when this medicine is not present; and you should take the ash of wheat, put it over the water; then strain that and administer it until you are confident that the sinus is healed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then administer it with water and honey mixed three times, and also administer water and honey mixed with vinegar, for the property of honey cleanses and washes, and the vinegar makes the sinus adhere, especially when the vinegar has a surplus of styptic and drying properties.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And as you do this for several days and become confident that the sinus is cleansed, then administer it with water that promotes flesh growth.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you should take diaphoretic herbs and dissolve them in rose oil and styptic vinegar; or administer it with several medicines and other herbs that have the properties I have already written about in the chapter on herbs.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and does not receive the enema tube, then gradually enlarge it with a small instrument, and pause with cloth wrapped in Egyptian or basilicon herbs until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	If the opening is wide, then you should suture together the edges and leave a quantity in which the enema may be introduced.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening from which the arm protrudes is raised to the upper parts, then you should make it dry in the pus base located where the arm can pass below, for when the arm is compressed at the depth of the bend, flesh will be generated there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus within the vicinity of the pus base as you wish, then you should perforate it so that you prepare the member in such a way that the arm can pass easily according to your preparation and without any obstruction hindering the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines to be applied over the sinus appropriately so that you can extend them onto a piece of linen.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the piece of linen should be of such quantity as to cover all of the sinus; then, with scissors, make an incision directly above the sinus opening that is somewhat wider than the opening itself; afterwards, extend another piece of linen soaked in cleansing agents over this incision according to its size, and place it at a distance from the sinus opening so that the arm can be easily inserted without having to apply the large piece of linen immediately but rather after some days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	But that which is over the sinus opening should be changed at all times so that it can absorb what is adhering to the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know whether what comes from the arm is much or little, or is digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	Thus you should consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and whether it is in an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter lying over the orifice of the sinus has adhered or tends to adhere, then you must loosen it either on the same day or on the third day, and when you loosen the plaque, then change the dressing for another one and renew the application.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if the sinus extends into spaces where there is thin pus, then do not despair of its adherence, for healing will tend to occur in such cases, just as some people experience delayed regeneration of flesh in their plaques, while others experience the opposite.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if from the sinus there has been discharged for several days a foul and undigested matter, then you should know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and becomes prolonged, then adjust to a drying effect in your medicines. If these medicines are moist by their nature and in their virtue, they must be dried as well when applied, especially when there is an excessive addition of honey.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last thing to do for those who are cured is to take a finely prepared ointment and dissolve it in rose oil. Let this be applied over an old dressing that contains beneficial substances, and apply it as needed.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems appropriate in that action, when there is no foul matter, to take a finely prepared ointment and honey which has been cooked until thickened, and use it; or take myrrh, aloes, and other ingredients, mix them all together, powder them over the honey while it is on the fire, then apply this mixture over a cloth and strengthen it over the sinus; or spread the honey that you have cooked to thicken over a cloth and sprinkle powdered ingredients over it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	For some wounds, administer a bandage with long and fine threads of celestial lily (which is the celestial lily) and flour of oats and centaury, and use these simples or mix them, tear them up and sieve them, then powder them over the honey which has been recommended; and thus apply it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinew is extended and does not heal with this treatment, then you should know that corruption is in its root, and it has already spread to the bones or other hard members or ligaments; now treat it with a fistula treatment as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	On the treatment of paronychia and cracked nails, and on the cutting of an additional finger and sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Paronychia is an abscess that arises from the edge of the nail of a toe or finger, and it can also occur in other fingers. When it becomes extended and its treatment is delayed, it may be an abscess caused by cautery or it may become corrupted. It discharges pus internally which corrodes the root of the nail; it often corrupts the entire nail and can even reach the bone inside, causing a foul odor. The extremity of the finger then becomes blackened in color.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have followed the treatment as we have described in the division and your condition does not improve, then it is necessary that you incise with a knife all the excess tissue that is rotten from the nail and promptly cauterize the wound afterwards, for prompt cautery is beneficial in such cases.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail are already retracting inward into the flesh, causing pain, then it is necessary that you place a thin thread behind the angle of the nail where it pains, and push it out and incise the flesh easily, and apply upon what remains of the flesh corrosive medicines until it is thoroughly cleaned; and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already penetrated the bone, at that time you must incise the bone and extract it, because it is never healed when the corrupted bone remains.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and corruption spread to the finger, then you must incise it at one of its joints as is appropriate for its recovery, and subsequently treat it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if there is an injury or inflammation under the nail, and there is severe pain in that area, then at the beginning you must bleed the patient, and subsequently dry the nail with a sharp instrument in a transverse section from above to below, and be careful not to cut into the flesh beneath the nail, for doing so would cause intense pain to the patient and lead to the formation of excessive granulation tissue in that area; and then treat the affected area with something that alleviates pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But the finger that is swollen, which occurs in many people, is mostly fleshy, or slightly on the bones, or mostly in the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them appear at the root of the joint, or the swelling is in some joints of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which appears in some joints of the finger is not serious, and that which appears at the joints is more troublesome.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those that are fleshy swellings, the incision is slight, and you should incise it near its root with a broad instrument.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But for that which appears at the root of the joint, the treatment is difficult; therefore, be careful not to amputate it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In that which is born from the nut, you should incise at the beginning the flesh around the bone in a round incision, and then use one of those saws suitable for this purpose, and afterwards treat what lies inside until it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	In the case of consolidation that occurs between certain movable parts or due to the birth of a person in such a way, or due to the healing of an injury or burning by fire, or similar cases, then you should treat that consolidation until the said parts return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between the edges to be fused in rose oil so that they do not consolidate too quickly, and separate them, or place a thin sheet of lead between them until they are consolidated as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs in certain parts of the palm, then you should treat that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suitable for the shape of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	For incisions on veins, these are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins that are varicose, and veins wrapped thickly with an excess of melancholic humors, which move through the limbs of the body, and their primary occurrence is in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers, workers, and those who carry heavy loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then you should administer purgation of the body with black hellebore several times to strongly expel it, and afterwards bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment of these with iron is according to two methods: one is that it should be incised and the black blood drawn out, and the other method is that the vein should be elevated and completely extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of the operation is as follows: At the beginning, place a cup with warm water under to allow the thick blood to dissolve, which becomes sediment in the cup. Then raise the cup from the patient's body to the most pus-filled part of the wound below the navel with a bandage, and then dry the vein at one point, or two, or three for wide cutting, and then lift the black blood away with your left hand below the cup towards it and above upwards until the amount of blood that you want and which is sufficient has been removed, and which the patient's strength can tolerate.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then advise them to avoid foods that generate black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And iterate the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and inform the patient about this at night.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But the lifting of it is as follows: You who shave the cup from the patient, if on him there are many hairs, and then place him in a bath and immerse the cup of the patient in warm water until it reddens and the veins are engorged; or exercise him with strenuous exercise if a bath is not available to you, until the limb is heated.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the bandage on the right side of the vein by cutting either at the end where the navel is, or lower down near the buttocks.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then wrap the bandage with hooks and incise the vein from all sides until it appears to the touch, and you should notice its appearance declining towards blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And thus as you proceed, use the bandage to ensure it appears white where it is tied.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Place then the rod inside which is raised and inclined from the collar, and suspend it with a hook of gold.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then cut another section near that section according to three statements, and then dissect the collar above the vein that appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then raise that and incise it at the rear section near the heel, and then extract it and raise it so that it exits through the second section, and then extract it from the section above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract it from the section that is the highest or most distant of all the sections, until everything is removed; then incise it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey to extract and raise it, then insert a strong double-edged needle and pull it out, or insert the rod below and rotate your hand in all directions until it is expelled.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not incised; for if it is broken, it becomes difficult to raise it and you will have caused harm to the patient by this injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when you have completely removed it outside, then apply to the site of the wound wool soaked in wine and unguents made from oiled and non-oiled substances, and treat it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vessel is contracted with tortuosity in its wrapping to the parts, and it is not straight as we have said, then you should cut along that at every part of its tortuosity and at the places of its wrapping, and then suspend it with hooks until you raise it completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And guard yourself in your section that you do not incise the vein and that you do not obstruct it, for it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and serve your prudence in it.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Form of the incident by which the operation is performed:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of applying ointment:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It should not be as sharp as a knife nor have a pointed end so that it does not obstruct the vein; and it should have great flexibility, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein because of its thinness; however, it should not be excessively thick as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of the extraction of the leg vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the thighs in warm lands such as in Al-Ategi in the land of Arabs and in the hot and dry lands of India where no grass or vegetation grows.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And this vein is generated in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its formation is from putrefaction that occurs below the skin, just as worms and vermin come forth within the body between the skin and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the occurrence of this condition is that inflammation occurs violently in the thigh; and nearby, the area becomes blistered; and soon the vein begins to appear from the location of that blister as if it were a plant rash.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the extremity of it appears, then you should wrap around that area a piece of lead weighing about two drachmas, and attach the lead to that spot so that it hangs from the thigh.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And so many times when you see some cause for parts outside, wrap that in lead and seal it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is elongated, then you cut a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not cut that little piece until it has come out, for if you cut that one, it contracts and goes into the flesh and causes an abscess and putrefaction in the place and a bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So it is necessary to treat it gently and extract it little by little until it is completely removed from the rear of it and there remains no cause for it in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And this vein has emerged in some people to the length of five palms and I have been told that one reached twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut during the time of its treatment, then insert the reed into the tract of it and perforate that one along the body until everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place with medicines for several days; and afterwards cure that with the treatment of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has multiple openings, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and comes out through multiple openings, and is spread from each opening.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore treat that as we have said in the division and according to what has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	On the section concerning worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is called in some lands bovine disease because often among them there is a worm of which one is born between the skin and the flesh, and it moves throughout the body up and down, and it shows itself to the sensation beyond the nerve from member to member until it breaks through the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	Concerning generation from corruption, it is through putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, and parasites occur in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	It is feared because of its malice, for when it enters the body and rises to the head, and reaches the heart, at that moment it forcefully ruptures there and causes various illnesses.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you wish to cure that and extract it, then it is done only by means of the gradual movement and appearance of it to the senses, and at that time you should press what is above it and what is below it with bandages and constriction, and afterwards it dries up and extracts that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it penetrates into the flesh and you do not find it, then you pause to cauterize with fire upon the place where it is, and the main cause that is feared is the corruption of it by which the place is corrupted as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you see that it has reached the head near the heart, then press above the eyebrow with strong constriction, and afterwards dry over it, and extract that; and it is necessary for the patient to use purification of their body with medicines evacuating bad putrid humors, and guard against foods generating putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Regarding the treatment of nasal disorders.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called "nafir" in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in certain limbs, and then changes from limb to limb.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that as I will now describe to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I went to visit a sick woman in a village, and when I uncovered her arm, I saw a small inflammation in the funis vein of the arm, and after it had been punctured for about an hour, I saw that this inflammation moved just like a live worm ascends this way, but more quickly than seems possible, as if it were living silver moving from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	Then the pain moved from that place to the muscle, and it stayed there for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it quickly moved to the other side of the body until it reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then he told me that it was moving throughout her body as I had seen; and I was greatly amazed at the change and the speed with which it moved from limb to limb.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had seen something like this before in my own patients in that manner, but I have never seen the pain change from one limb to another so distinctly.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see this in my patients as I did in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think this was possible except that the woman was of delicate constitution, with thin limbs and exposed veins, in which this airiness of sensation appeared to change.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this does not appear in those who are robust and have healthy flesh with sturdy veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to treat it and the patient feels this pain, immediately apply pressure to that area gently and quickly move over it until this confined airiness has exited, and then cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you do not use them [the fingers] to feel the swelling, then treat it with a decoction of the body and with what expels wind, and charm those nasty pills and those of serpentium and similar.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of the extraction of thorns.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Thorns are diverse according to their species, and according to the parts of the body in which they lodge, for their diversity is such that some have large points, others small, some concave, others blunt; and among them are those with three angles, and those which have tongues; and there are those which are like slender rods.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and parts in which they lodge is according to two ways: for the members or principal members concave, such as the brain, heart, liver, spine, lungs, ribs, bowels, bladder, and similar; and when you catch one of these members and it appears to you as signs of death, which I will recount shortly, then it behooves you to avoid the extraction of that thorn in those where death would occur due to its location in the deepest parts. And if such bad signs do not appear to you and the thorn is not hidden in the depth of the member, then you extract that one and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of the brain are when you catch the thorn, it penetrates the bone, and exits at the cephalic point which is above the brain, for it causes sudden fever, scotoma, vertigo, rigidity in the fingers, inflammation and heat of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, vomiting of bile, and often speech is cut off and the voice destroyed. Moisture like white powder comes out from the location of the wound, and its appearance resembles a watery consistency of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if I show you these signs, then you abstain from treatment and the extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	Mark the signs of the arrow when it hits the heart, so that it is near the left nipple, and feel there where it is fixed in a hard part, not in a soft part; and the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the pulse, and there flows black blood from the wound, and the extremities become cold, and sweat turns cold, and syncope occurs; therefore you know that death will come very soon.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are foam of blood from the wound, and the veins near the neck are swollen, and the complexion is changed, and he exhales a great breath, and demands for air with difficulty.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow hits the membrane that is in the chest, and the pain then is near the small ribs, and it causes great and violent pain and sighing, and there is no movement at all of the limbs by the muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow hits the stomach, then very soon the wound vomits some undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow hits the abdomen, and it is fixed there, some part of the wound splits open, or the membrane, or intestine which is ruptured, then there is no hope in the treatment or extraction of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow hits the bladder, and urine is discharged, and some cause of injury spreads to other parts, and very soon there is pain over the body, then you know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Like other members also as in the face, the neck, and the groin, and the shoulders and the helpers, and the vertebrae of the back, and the collarbone, and the chest bone and things like them of the members, they are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not find vein nor artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recount this to you as I have seen regarding the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand about their treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The reason for this is that when an arrow was embedded in the lacrimal bone at the root of his nose, I extracted it from him on the other side, left the granules behind in his ear, and he healed without any harm coming to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had embedded in him in the gray matter of his eye, leaving the eyelid behind, and the arrow was already hidden and could not be completely removed except for a small part to which it adhered to its shaft. It was a large sharp arrow of those used by Turkish soldiers, with iron like a lion's head but without ears.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew recovered, and no harm came to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had it embedded in his groin, and it was an Arabic arrow, which had ears; then I incised around that between two fingers, and it was already submerged in his groin; then I carefully worked on it, and soon afterward I removed it, and the Christian recovered.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who had it embedded in his belly, and he was thought to die because of that; but after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition, I incised around the arrow and worked on it, and he recovered, and no harmful accident befell him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And a man was wounded by an arrow in the buttocks, and the wound healed over the arrow, and after seven days the arrow came out at the head of the anus.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And a woman was wounded by an arrow in her abdomen, and the wound healed over it inside, and there was no change in her condition, and the woman did not experience any difficulty with any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And there was another man who was wounded by an arrow in his face, and the wound healed over it, and they removed the arrow without him experiencing any pain, and this is similar to the previous cases.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And the arrow was extracted from the man who was the prince of the king; it had been embedded in the middle of his nose and had slightly moved towards the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for his treatment near the time of removing the arrow within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I found the wound of the arrow quite narrow; and then I examined it with a probe, but could not feel it there; however, he felt pain just below his right ear, and then I suspected that this pain was due to the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied a plaster to the area that has attracting and digestive properties, hoping that it would cause an abscess to appear so that I could locate the arrow there.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And no significant incident occurred in the area where I thought the arrow might be; and I continued to apply the plaster for several days without any incident occurring; and meanwhile, the wound healed, and he complained of pain from the extraction attempt over the course of several days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and reported this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Then I applied an acute corrosive medicine for several days until it penetrated the wound, and then I tested that by touching it, and found the extremity of the arrowhead fine, which adhered to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Then I adjusted the opening of the wound with that acute medicine until it became visible to me clearly the extremity of the arrowhead, and passed for me through a period of time within four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And after the wound had become enlarged, and I was able to insert forceps into it, but did not oblige myself to do so immediately. Instead, I continued to refine and devise methods of extraction until one day I began using the forceps as described at the end of this chapter to remove it; and then I restored the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, but I did restore it and the wound healed, and the patient recovered fully without any further cause for concern.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I advise you about the quality of extracting certain arrows so that you may apply this rule and its significance to what has not been mentioned, for the parts of this art and the definitions thereof are not comprehensible in narration nor understood without this book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise craftsmen compare in few words; and about what is present concerning what is absent; and discover new operations and new instruments from the descent of causes foreign to the art when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore, I say that arrows are not extracted from the members in which they are embedded except in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they intersect; or by the opposite part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	Of that which is pierced by the place where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place, and is pulled out and removed.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if he does not obey the advice about the hour at which to remove it, you should leave it for some days until the flesh around it heals and the attachment and its removal become easier.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is embedded in bone and he does not obey your advice, you should leave it for some days and gently move it each day to ease the attachment until it can be removed.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if he does not obey your advice for some days, then you should drill around the arrow in that bone with a fine gimlet until the space around the arrow is enlarged, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is embedded in the bone of the head and has penetrated one of the ventricles of the brain, and the injury shows some of those symptoms I have mentioned, then abstain from extracting the arrow and leave it until his condition stabilizes for some days; for if the arrow reaches the heart, death will not be delayed.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is embedded only in the body of the bone and does not pass into the heart, and the injury remains stable for some days without any cause for those symptoms, then you should devise a way to remove the arrow carefully.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is firmly embedded and he does not obey your advice for its removal, then you should administer drills around the arrow as we have recommended, and afterwards treat the area until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the arrow is already hidden in the body and out of reach of sensation, then you probe for it there, and if you feel it, then pull it out with some instrument suitable for attracting the iron.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it because of the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow shaft, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins here, then enlarge the wound so that it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is adhered to the ears with any instrument attached, then cut away the flesh in which it is embedded as much as you can; and act upon this, if you cannot avoid cutting the flesh in the fracture of the ears and twisting them until they yield.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in whatever place it is, then use twisting with your hand and forceps in all ways until it yields; and be careful with the greatest care that the arrow does not break and that it becomes difficult to attract it and extract it.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot manage it at that time, then leave it for several days until the parts around it become pusified, and then attempt it when they are softened.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if bleeding occurs contrary to what is desired, then administer what we have said about the treatment in that chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard against cutting into veins, nerves, or tendons, and administer your efforts in every possible way to avoid the arrow; do this with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness as I recommend to you.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And so that you make the incision according to the shape of the patient's body, in accordance with which place the fire for securing the bandage after the incision, for it is more helpful.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If that is not possible for you, now administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	However, for incisions that are made on the opposite side from where you are, or if you have already processed some part of them outside, or if there is inflammation at the end of the incision due to feeling pressure below the rib area and you raise that part; then you should cut above it. And let the section be according to the amount by which the forceps take hold; and then pull that part, for it has been made light by this method.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	However, if it is retained in the bone, now you should twist the blade according to the opposite direction in which the incision presses against the bone, and enlarge as you insert it, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave that for several days, and then repeat it when the time is right.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the incision is there, now you should proceed with it at that location.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	However, if the shaft is embedded and you want to administer impulse, now you should insert and do this, if it is dull, use a curved tool so that it enters the curvature of it into the base of the incision and then proceed with it there.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	However, if the incision is curved, now you should proceed with it using a strong tool by entering into it, for the incision is lightened by this.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the bandage is poisoned, now you must hollow out all the flesh in which the venom is, as much as is possible for you to do so, and then treat that with what seems appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the bandage sticks to the feet, or to the belly, or to the bladder, or to the side, and it is close so that you touch it with your hand, and it is possible for you to cut over it, now cut over it and guard against injury to veins or nerves, and extract it, and then treat the wound as seems appropriate, and care for it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps with which bandages are pulled:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the extremities of these be shaped like the beak of a bird, which is made like pincers so that they do not let go of the bandage.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from those are made special hooks, large, few and smaller, according to the quantity of the size of the bandage and the scarcity of its pieces, and the breadth of the wound, and the constriction of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of an impelling concave on this extremity that curves like the claw of a bird so that it may easily guide the instrument of the bandage in it, and the impulse of this tool:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of an impelling hook extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Like a rod so that it may easily guide the instrument into the concave bandage and is pushed with that.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for phlebotomy of which one usually performs bloodletting are thirty, of which sixteen are superficial pulsating veins, two of which are near the ears and are called alhasisain; two branches that appear in both temples; and two veins located at the inner corners of the eyes, which are called aspicientz; and the prepared vein situated at the middle part of the forehead; and the vein at the tip of the nose; and two grooves on the neck; and two veins in the upper lip; and two veins in the lower lip; and these are the veins that are called algelic; and there are two veins below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are five. One of these is the cephalic vein, which resembles the wild lettuce; and the people call it "the vein of the head," and it sounds (likely a transcription error or dialectal usage), and it is called a median vein, and it is composed of one branch of the basilic vein, and another branch of the cephalic vein; and they name that one the people call "vein of the whole body," and the basilic vein is situated on the domestic side, and it is called "little finger," and they commonly call it "the vein of the abdomen"; and the flexor of the arm, which is located over the cubital area, and in this one phlebotomy is performed, and it appears on the forearm by a clear appearance; and the salvatella vein, which is between the thumb and the smallest finger, and it is found in both arms.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the thigh and the groin there are three veins. One of these is located below the curve at the back of the wild side; and the second is called sophena, and its location is below the groin on the domestic side; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the groin on the wild side; and in the groin there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The treatment of veins near the ears is for catarrhs, emigrations, and old ulcers and bad chronic conditions of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those veins is as I recommend to you: shave the patient's head, and rub the patient’s head in the occipital area at the location of both veins with a large cloth with good friction; then hold the patient's neck with a bandage so that the two veins and their locations near the ears appear in two lower areas of the head; and feel them with your finger, and if you can feel the pulse in those veins with your finger, this is the sign to proceed.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the lancet, and use that which is sharp, and then insert it beneath the vein until the blood flows to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then raise your hand with the vein and the surrounding area upwards and cut the vein with a sharp incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the amount of two fingers aligned or around that much; and let the blood flow out as much as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then hold it with bandages and let it heal.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already in the beginning of the book, I have described the incision of those veins and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But for the two arteries near the temples, the treatment of bloodletting is for chronic and severe migraines, continuous ophthalmia, and acute effusions of excess fluids to the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	Of the quality of phlebotomy I will now tell you what I advise: constrain the patient to sit upright so that his two veins appear clearly and feel his pulse below your finger; then you may begin.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And now raise the tourniquet above the vein with your indicated finger, and introduce the lancet below, raising the vein up; and incise it as you did with the other two veins; let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then loosen the patient’s restraint, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then apply a bandage and poultices, and bind it tightly above with strong compression, leaving it so until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And now I have recalled them, and described the incision, and drawn them at the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus the benefit of phlebotomy from the frontal vein is now the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient diseases of the face and migraines and severe pain and foul-smelling ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of phlebotomy from there is what I advise you; so the patient should bind his arm with a bandage until the vein appears; then take the instrument called a lancet, which has this form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the sharp point of the lancet at the head of the vein and press it upon it either by inclining or for any other reason in the manner described, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you desire; then release the patient's puncture and bind it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	In some cases, the phlebotomy is made lateral, but it is not necessary that the phlebotomy be sharp like other phlebotomies; rather, it should have a blunt tip, and the incision is made transversely because the bone is close by and a sharp phlebotomy might easily break through to the bone when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	May the treatment of the two veins which are next to the tear ducts of both eyes be for eye itch, pain, and grease in the eyes, and for illnesses of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient should hold his arm with a bandage, and then you should perform the phlebotomy there, while you stand above the patient's head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the phlebotomy should be performed transversely along a little distance from the phlebotomy point because in that location there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy tool is subtle, its tip could easily break through with little force.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and pause on that spot, hold it like that for one night, and then release it.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	May the phlebotomy of the vein of the nose be used for acute fever and violent headache, and for illnesses of the face and migraines and pain that occur in the face, especially when they are chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of this phlebotomy is that the patient should hold their own neck and then place your left hand on the patient's nose, and take the subtle phlebotomy tool long and insert it in the middle part of the nose base straight, for the vein does not appear to touch here, and blood will begin to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Cut off the vein gradually and let the blood flow according to your need; then bind it up for one night, since it heals quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The benefit of phlebotomy is that it prevents the swelling of glands, the beginning of leprosy, and many other diseases, as well as impetigo and severe corrosive ulcers, just as in the case of herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of phlebotomy in these cases is that the patient lies down with their head lower than the rest of their body; and the surgeon stands over the patient's head, while the patient sits upright on a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then, phlebotomize the long vein with the wide one gradually in small amounts; and afterwards extract blood according to the season or quantity needed as per your requirement; and then do the same for the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then loosen the bandage and stretch both veins gently to prevent them from being constricted, and leave it for the night since the ailment is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the benefit of phlebotomy for thick veins is also helpful against small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and severe ulcers and cracks, as well as bad ulcers that occur in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of phlebotomy in these cases is that you make the patient lie before you, and tie their head with a bandage, then open their lips and examine two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the indication for each is by the darkness of each, and this is more evident because around them are small black veins; and then you incise each separately.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If there is doubt in you and you do not know which one it is, then understand that the incision should be made into the largest of them and the most evident of them.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make an incision between the two veins that are on top of the lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	However, it is customary to incise the two veins that are on the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	However, the incision of the two veins below the tongue is more appropriate for phlebotomy of the cephalic area, for preventive measures that are in the throat, for diseases of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those veins is that it prevents the disease between your teeth before the sun rises, and it raises the tongue up, and look below the tongue where one side of the vein and the other side of the vein are, and the color of each tends towards blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then phlebotomize each one; and be careful not to cut too deeply when phlebotomizing them, for below these are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are phlebotomized in the neck are those that run through all people, and the phlebotomy of theirs is done in two ways: either place a small mirror or olive branch with subtlety inclined; or use a scalpel for phlebotomy, and check if it bleeds, and this is the form of it.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this bleeding is what you should aim for, making a section and of those being specific to the side and subtlety according to the width of the veins and according to the constriction of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Method of cutting for an abscess:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Should the abscess be large with frequent occurrences, it is convenient to open the curved veins that are full and whose origins appear thick, and those that contain thick blood should be treated.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the method of olive artery incision:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this incision is of lesser width and has a finer end, and it is suitable for the phlebotomy of fine veins that contain thin blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	But the benefit of phlebotomy from the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: for it extracts blood from diseases that affect below the nape and neck, and from what affects the legs and abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is necessary for the phlebotomist, when performing phlebotomy on that vein, to be very careful with it and to have great fear of it, because below the vein there is an artery. If he errs and hits the artery during the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will cut that artery and cause a profuse flow of blood. Therefore, one should not perform phlebotomy on that vein with a sharp instrument but rather with a cutting blade like a lancet.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear clearly, then it is necessary to leave that one and switch to another, or search for some branch of it. Or you can perform phlebotomy at the end of the arm where it is visible; and perform phlebotomy on that with a lancet as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	But if you want phlebotomy of the median vein, then it is necessary before the constriction of the arm to touch the place between where you know the location of the wrist, and slightly above that point; and then hold the arm and locate the vein with a concave incision for phlebotomy using a lancet as we have said; and be careful not to hit the artery in any part of its location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you see, as you bind the bandage, swelling in the place that you have marked thin, then that swelling is an inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid that.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy as thin as a child's urine, and the blood is fine and thin, then you know it is the blood of an artery; and then you cut and pause your hand above that for a long space; and soon remove your hand, and if the blood is cut off after so many moments, then you bind the arm and leave it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And keep the patient away from his mucus, and let him be overcautious about it, and do not allow that for several days until he is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the blood does not stop flowing and you must act without medical assistance present, then you should cut the artery if it is apparent to you; for the extremity has become constricted and the blood is no longer flowing. Or take a piece of cloth, wet it with water, and apply half of it tightly over the vein with bandages and powders on the other side the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the blood has stopped flowing, that is good; but if not, then proceed with the treatment as described in the previous instructions for stopping the flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And stopping the blood flow from him is difficult in many circumstances due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of bandaging the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But for the dark vein, phlebotomy is helpful in extracting blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; as we have said, this is composed of parts of basil and parts of cephalic, as we have mentioned.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	Here is the translation into English:
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should divide the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it attracts blood from the head and relieves eye diseases.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And here precisely, if you want the phlebotomist to puncture either an olive vein or a myrtle vein; for it is the safest of all veins, as it is neither close to arteries nor nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	But it is necessary for you to remember when performing phlebotomy that you should not puncture only the head of the lizard vein, and seek a place farther away, and do not note its location unless it is found suitable after the first percussion, meaning that there are several areas available for phlebotomy.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	But it is often the case that an abscess forms in some people when phlebotomy is not performed on the first attempt, so do not neglect to address that abscess.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	But the quality of the phlebotomy of that vein and its consequences must be carefully considered for their proper correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is about knowing that phlebotomy should be administered only for the preservation of health and with hope and caution regarding the onset of diseases. Phlebotomy should be performed on one of the veins that are suitable, which are: cephalic, fusca (blue), and basilica. It should be done at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter near mealtime when signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And let phlebotomy be performed when the third hour has passed since the first pus appeared.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	And let phlebotomy be administered whenever there is convenience and necessity for it, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and at any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is not appropriate to perform phlebotomy on a child until they are fourteen years old, and a woman who is pregnant should not have phlebotomy done on her except from the fourth month until the seventh, and elderly women who have passed sixty years should not be subjected to phlebotomy.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wishes to be phlebotomed by any method, it is appropriate for them to cleanse their bowels before the phlebotomy with an enema, if there is retained fecal matter in them, so that the veins do not attract superfluous fluids during the phlebotomy of the cleansed bowels, which are pure, and so that they do not affect the principal limbs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not phlebotomize patients who are suffering from severe nausea and drunkenness, or those recovering from illness or intoxication until these conditions have subsided, nor those with dropsy. Also, be cautious about performing phlebotomy near the onset of colic pain and vomiting, and after bowel issues, and during periods of frequent sexual activity, work, or exercise, or fasting and sleep deprivation, and any other cause that dissolves virtue, whether it is corporeal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And before performing phlebotomy, consider the subtlety of the humor, especially if the blood is thick, by observing diet and drinks, and using medicines if it is possible to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And before phlebotomy, take a bath if there is no prohibiting cause, or exercise for some time to make the blood thinner.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And stop the phlebotomy at noon on that day, which is about the hour of terce, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And pierce it so that the foot of that person may be protected on that day from all harmful animal accidents, such as cramp, anger, fear, and from all bodily exertions, such as excessive work and unnecessary pain and fatigue and similar things.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at his seat have the causes present in the use of which it is customary for people to employ aromatics and odors and balms and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And the phlebotomist should sit on a chair that is higher than the chair of the person who is to be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then draw out his arm and rub it with the phlebotomist's hand two or three times; and then tighten the ligature with a cord and wrap it around two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let the ligature be timely, for if the ligature is not tight enough, or if it is too loose, it prevents the flow of blood; or if it is too tight, and then it prevents the course of the blood too much.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And then after the ligature, have the person who is to be bled rub his hands together vigorously among them until the veins are swollen and become distinct.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the phlebotomist anoints his phlebotomy instrument with a little bit of proper old oil; and then places his index finger of the left hand on that vein, at the location where the phlebotomy is to be performed, so that the vein moves slightly, and the percussion is steady because among the veins there is one that acts like a fleeing string for the phlebotomy, and from those it is full of air; when you place the phlebotomy instrument on that one, it contracts away from the phlebotomy, and the phlebotomist is confused; and the phlebotomy does not puncture the vein, and if it does puncture, that one is narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, let the phlebotomist be steady and diligent in all these matters.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And immediately after the phlebotomy, if the vein is open in one place, that is good; but if not, repeat this at another site, or wait a little while, or proceed with caution, if the area is not inflamed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area is inflamed or the patient becomes fearful, then you should leave it for a day or two, and do not bind it tightly, for that would quickly cause an abscess, nor should the patient bathe.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the incision is small and blood flows gently, and you fear that not enough blood will flow to reach the desired amount, then repeat the phlebotomy at that site cautiously and make the incision slightly larger, but do this carefully before the area becomes inflamed, for in most people a small incision causes inflammation.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if you see that the area is already inflamed, then do not repeat the procedure there, for it will serve no purpose; and apply some part of the incision to a poultice of oil, as this facilitates the flow of blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And in this case, oil is better than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, administer a poultice of oil for every phlebotomy in which you open veins that are restricted by the flow of blood, and use this when paused between procedures on the area, as the blood becomes finer and is less turbulent when it flows freely.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the place of phlebotomy a great abscess is generated, which happens sometimes, and especially to those who have not been bled recently or whose vein was only slightly opened, then you should treat it by placing a sponge infused with water and salt, slightly warmed, upon that area for one hour, because it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And make sure to do this near the exit of the blood from that vein or from another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if a black or green discoloration remains in that place for several days, do not be concerned about it; and if you wish, apply to that area some poultice of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some preparation of mint juice or collyrium or something similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And sometimes abscesses and swellings occur instead of phlebotomy from the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore place your hand on that area, and if you find softness from your compression on it, then that swelling is bad and harmful; and then be careful not to apply any of the preparations we mentioned, for the blood will easily flow from an artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply a plaster that has styptic properties to harden the area, and then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And it is necessary to draw blood from a person according to the quantity of their strength and according to the color appearing in the blood as it overcomes.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, then let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see it thick, then let it flow until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is acute, until the sharpness of it is diminished.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	For someone who is healthy and strong and in need of bloodletting at one time, the phlebotomy of the vein should be enlarged and let slowly.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for someone who is weak, the opposite should be done, and it should be extracted in small quantities over multiple sessions, and let quickly.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best method to use in venous phlebotomy is the cross-section cut, not puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy is safe from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more effective and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And for those who are accustomed to fainting due to phlebotomy, you should treat them before the phlebotomy with a small amount of bread infused in lemon juice or simple oxymel heated; and extract the blood in three or four sessions.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if the patient is of a delicate constitution, then before phlebotomy give them bread infused in myrrh syrup or in aromatic honey flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or in an aromatic syrup with a pleasant smell.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs due to phlebotomy and is caused by the loss of too much blood, then they should drink water and a fragrant, subtle syrup; use aromatics with vinegar, and apply cold compresses to their limbs.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of the chapter on fainting due to evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And for one who wishes to open the vein and dissolve the blood for the second time, he should use the feather, whose virtue is to evacuate the blood little by little, as is in proportion to the amount of its virtue over continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	And for one who wishes to open the vein and remove his blood for the second time, and if his body is strong, he should do this about seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	And for one who wishes to draw the blood from his body contrary to the side to which it inclines, he should be bled on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	And for a body in which there is already hot and congested blood that causes fever, it should be drawn off once, and a large quantity of blood should be taken to avoid syncope, while maintaining all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on the pulse point where the blood leaves the body, so that death does not occur instead of syncope, for many times this has happened when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And when you wish to release the vein and evacuate the blood for the second time, since the orifices of the vein are already closed and it is difficult for the blood to flow out, do not press too forcefully or bend it suddenly, for this is too harsh.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Handle the release within which you are to phlebotomize again; or remedy this by applying heat to the congested area of the phlebotomy where blood has coagulated in the vein opening; or apply on it a plaster of theriac or sage, and compress it gently until the blood is out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, at that time do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood a second time and there is no excuse, then bleed that person in another site on the same arm or in a vein on the other arm.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And when the vein called "the cord of the arm" is punctured instead of thefuscus or the basilica veins, since they are not easily found or hidden, it consists of these.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of bleeding the arm is that the patient should immerse their hand in warm water until it turns red, so that the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then wrap a tight bandage above the area where you will make the incision; and then bleed following the small transverse direction, not latitudinally or longitudinally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the incision be wide, and let your puncture for bleeding that person near the joint of the hand be small.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the blood flow is restricted, then immerse the hand in warm water again and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your goal.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from immersing your hand in warm water, and similarly pause the process of stopping the blood flow in warm water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the puncturing of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because there are no pulsating veins or nerves there.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the vein on the right hand is appropriate for diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you bind your hand tightly or with a cord, after placing it in hot water so that the vein swells and becomes clearly visible to everyone; then cut across that vein; and if you do not cut it completely, this will be harmful.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And do not release your hand after the phlebotomy, for fear that you might injure the nerves of the aforementioned parts deprived of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then immerse your hand in hot water and let the blood flow in that manner, for if you do not immerse it in hot water, the blood will coagulate at the venous opening, and this is prohibited.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is extracted in the required quantity, then apply pressure on the vein with oil and salt so that it does not close too quickly; and similarly, you should do this for all procedures carefully.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	And the benefit of the phlebotomy of the vein on the left hand is that it is appropriate for diseases of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly with this phlebotomy as you did with the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of the phlebotomy of the sephena vein is for diseases located in the lower part of the body, such as kidney diseases, and for retention of menstruation, and for diseases of the joints and ulcers of old wounds, and similar conditions.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	Of the quality of phlebotomy it is that the patient plunges his arm into hot water and makes friction upon it until the veins appear; and he puts a cord above the joint of the arm where it bends, and the place of the vein appears below the said joints, and from there spreads on the face of the arm in small branches.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore, phlebotomize the largest branch below the bend below the said junction, for it is better and more effective.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you phlebotomize that on the face of the arm, then be careful of the nerves that are below it on the face of the arm, and pause your phlebotomy at the point where you phlebotomize across, as if you wanted to incise it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And so the phlebotomy is complete.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the letting of blood is prohibited; then you should immerse the arm in hot water again and allow the blood to flow in that area until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist errs on the first attempt, then proceed with another phlebotomy above the previous one, for the location is effective; and do not fear this mistake, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly, do the same for the phlebotomy of the other arm.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, the location, as we have said, is below the knee behind the bone.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the benefit of phlebotomy is to relieve pain in the side when it is due to excess blood.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	Of the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient enter into bath, and hasten and strain the body of him from the part of the navel up to above the ankle in four places with a long thin bandage, for it appears only by this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then you phlebotomize that according to each angle as is possible and according to the transverse, which is better; or incise that by incision or cut that by cutting, for the place of him is salt.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in the words of men a slight swelling; and if you find that, and it does not appear to the sense of all, then phlebotomize some branch of it, and that is which appears on the two of the hand behind the finger auricular and the finger anular.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And beware of the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity that you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then loosen the bandage and pause on the place of the phlebotomy to compress the place, for it is quickly healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of venotoma and of the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Venotomies are usually made from horns, or from earth, or from flint.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And venotoma is done according to two methods: one of them is as scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is venotoma without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this venotoma which is without scarification is according to two methods, for it is either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the venotomies that are usually administered with scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen places on the body, of which one where venotomies are placed is alnocrati, and it is at the back part of the head; and another middle place between two parts of the neck; and venotomies under the chin below the jaw near the mouth; and venotomies of the two cheeks; and venotomies of alohoster, which is above the collarbone; and venotomies of two armpits; and venotomies of two thighs; and venotomies of two feet.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	From the swelling you do not draw blood except from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and through this you do not catch the virtue through those [veins], just as it is done by phlebotomy; nor does it matter whether venesection be performed near a fire or away from fire in any disease caused by retention until all that is within the body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If necessity causes venesection due to illness or for regular maintenance, administer that at any time at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, in the middle of the location and at whatever time may be appropriate.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that in those men in whom blood is multiplied within such that they need extraction by venesection and it causes them heaviness and swelling; and of these, one finds retention and hardness in their face and head, and in their neck; and of these, one finds a slow response in their face and forehead, darkness and dullness in their eyes; and of those whose place for venesection is determined; and of these, one finds an increase in laughter; and of these, one finds a taste of blood in their mouth, or that the tongue is coated and they spit blood; and of these, one finds an excess of sleep, and of those who see hardness, old age, plagues, and other similar causes during sleep.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And when you encounter any of those causes, and particularly if it is in the third or middle of the month, I command that venesection be performed after two or three hours have passed from noon.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	The benefit of venesection from the neck is that when it relieves heaviness in the head and what causes sinking in the eyes; but it must be done near complete evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this vein is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic region.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not good to use that which is of full friction, or in which there is a cold, because it gives great harm to the patient.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason, it is not advisable to use those old veins, and in many cases, they cause fragile illnesses.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But for the one who is continuously having it done on them, memory loss may occur; and therefore, you should instruct the practitioner to pause their hand briefly when removing the cupping vessel from the area, in order to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But cupping on the nape is in the place of phlebotomy for the dark vein and the basilic vein: and thus it benefits asthma, constriction of breath, splitting pain in the chest, coughing, and congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is necessary to lift the cupping vessel on the nape slightly, for if it is left below too long, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And cupping on the back of the head benefits accidental pains in the head and ophthalmia, migraine, nasal congestion, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy for the basilic vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And you should instruct the cupping practitioner not to press their hand during incision so as not to injure the artery and cause a flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And cupping below the chin benefits alcohol-related issues in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and resembles treatments for similar illnesses that occur in the mouth, and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the alheric vein which is on both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	Avoid the windiness that is made over the two spatulas by applying a compress, which is made by an abundance of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And for the windiness between the two parts inside the flanks, apply forceful phlebotomy from three veins, which are the basilica, fusca, and cephalic, because they attract blood from all the smaller veins in that area more than other larger veins, until the attraction reaches these three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the windworker not to proceed with incision, because the area is bare of flesh, and leave it alone where there are nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a windiness on which the treatment is applied over the hemorrhoids of the anus and to the ulcers that are nearby.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you should command the windworker to make a large and strong windiness, because the area in question requires powerful drying. For traumatic cases, use subtle windinesses and apply incisions where necessary.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Avoid windinesses on small areas because they draw blood from the entire body and can cause pain in old wounds of the ribs and chest, and bladder issues; they also provoke menstruation and can lead to boils and abscesses. They should be used instead of phlebotomy from two saphenas, alahorcoben, and two cavilhas.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, they weaken the entire body and can cause fainting in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And for the windiness of the alahorcoben, the force applied should be proportional to the force used in windinesses of two areas.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	Regarding the quality of the position of the cupping vessels, place the vessel at the beginning and suck it gently and appropriately, and do not prolong the position of the cupping vessels, but place them quickly, and remove them carefully, so that the humors come to the site by equal distribution.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop repeating this and continue until you see the area turn red and swell, and the firmness of the blood becomes apparent.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Now you should make incisions and repeat the suction gradually, and then observe the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For a person with tender flesh and few pores should be scarified only once, not pressed repeatedly, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And instruct the cupper to enlarge the scarification slightly and prolong it, and perform the suction with ease and moderation.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thick, then it is necessary to scarify twice, because in the first session the pathway for the refinement of the blood and its moisture is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second session, use the acquired precision for the extraction of thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very impure, then perform the scarification for a third time so that it achieves the desired result.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the blood gradually or in small amounts, one scarification is sufficient for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a large amount of blood, we perform extensive scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to scarify more extensively.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	Regarding the term of incision, in which the depth of the wound is concerned only.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the one whose wound is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are narrow, it is necessary that the places for the cupping vessels be anointed with soothing, penetrating, and resolving oils; if it is in summer, such as aloes oil or violet oil, or oil of crushed daisies, or goose grease; and if it is in winter, narcissus oil, lily oil, camomile oil, or linseed oil, and similar ones.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the exudate is thick and congealed, then the oil should be marigold oil, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or aniseed oil, and similar ones.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the cupping vessel has large pores for soft flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and for these the places of cupping near the cupping should be washed with rose water or cold water mixed with solutio, or chicken broth, or bouillon, and similar ones.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for the one whose blood is of thick moisture, wash his cupping sites with vinegar water, or with water of myrtle and sumac, and similar ones.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for the one whose exudates are thick, wash his cupping sites with aged vinegar, or with water of savory, which is marjoram, or of anise decoction, or chamomile, and similar ones.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it is necessary that the cupping be done before bathing; preferably it should be administered shortly after bathing by one hour or two, and it is necessary that he sleeps near the cupping.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is needed for the regulation of cupping or bloodletting before cupping.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Consider this at the beginning: if the cupper or the one who needs to be bled is choleric and there is wind in the sharp blood with inflammation, then you should give cooling causes such as sour grapes, endive, lettuce, saffron, and julep, and things similar to these.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause their food such as poultry, meat of suitable birds, and sweetened foods, and things similar to these.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for the one whose complexion is cold, you should have them drink syrup of amber or syrup of saffron seeds with sumac, and some moderately strong spice between dawn and night; and advise them to use little drinking and eating, and pause foods such as poultry, fish, small birds, and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it should be that on the day of cupping and bleeding, drinking should be more than food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it should be given to drink at certain times to some people tyrian al-farakh, or medicine of musk, which is masticated musk, or rock candy before cupping or bleeding or nearby, so that the principal members are comforted and that the blood becomes finer; and they should not take those heating substances.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But let the cupping be done without incision in areas such as above the groin, on the thigh and gout area, and around the navel, at the locations of the costal arches, and the hollow of the flank, because these members cannot tolerate incisions.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not sought for anything else but attraction of blood from a limb, just as the cupping glass is applied to the breast in the disease of flux of blood from the nose; and they use that so that the coagulated phlegm may be dissolved by the inflammation of the limb, just as the cupping glass is applied to the belly and navel; for that rarefies the limb and heats it and removes the pain by resolving the flatulence.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is applied to the veins when they are obstructed or weak, for by the power of attraction it raises obstructions and eliminates weakness from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly it does when applied to the liver and spleen to expel flatulence, for it encloses the air in those organs.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these cupping glasses are administered empty with suction only; and some are administered over a fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some are administered full of hot water in diseases of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is so that the cupping glass may be full and larger, either with hot water alone or with water in which herbs suitable for this purpose have been boiled.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of the cupping glass administered over fire: let the diameter of the opening be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the preon (a term possibly referring to a material or substance) shall be half a palm; and in its middle part, at the location which is in the circuit, let it be half of that, with the rim small enough so that a needle can enter it.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made of ram's horn or citrus, with thick edges, leather, gums, and smooth so that it does not hurt the limb due to its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let a thread be passed transversely through the bone or iron, upon which is placed a candle at the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this large suction cup is greater than the one we have recommended; and the small size depends on the illness and the condition of the person using it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the suction cups for children and weak individuals should be different from those used by young and robust people.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this suction cup over fire upon the limb is that it should extend the skin over the fire of wood sufficiently in front of a small candle made of wax, and place it on top of the transverse thread in the proper location of the suction cup, so that the fire is ignited around the lower part to prevent the body of the patient from being burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And it should be placed upon the member of the patient, and the finger should be on the spot we have mentioned, so that when we use the suction cups and do not want to keep the finger there and allow the vapor to rise over that spot, the suction cup will dissolve immediately.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And apply the skin according to its method, and repeat this if you need to use it again.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	But in the case of a suction cup used for treating pleurisy, it is filled with water, in which there is no transverse thread or spot, and it is applied to the limb only when full of water.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And the larger this suction cup is, the better, so that it can hold a greater amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter XC VII.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting should not be administered in the joints but in those members where it is impossible to apply cupping due to their small size, such as the gums and palate and similar areas; or on parts of the body devoid of flesh, such as the fingers and nose and similar areas.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those leeches that you have found should be in the waters below clean and wholesome places.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then they should be left in clean water day and night until they are hungry, so that there is no remaining cause inside them; and then evacuate the body at the beginning of phlebotomy and cupping; and then rub the member of the patient until it reddens; and then place them on the area.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and satisfied.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suction the area with cupping, it is better for relief.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the area with vinegar and then with clean water; and it should be rubbed and pressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the blood flow extends around the site where the leeches were applied and there is any residue, then place a piece of linen in cold water and apply it until the residue is absorbed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood continues to flow, then sprinkle vitriol powder or other astringent powders on it until the bleeding stops; or apply crushed fava beans to the area and leave them until they adhere to the site, at which point the bleeding will be stopped.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	In case it is necessary, repeat the application of leeches, when possible replace those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the leeches are prohibited from suspending, then at that time wash the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the spots to let blood; and afterwards they should be paused, for those when feeling any blood will immediately react.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to stop, sprinkle a little powdered aloes, or salt, or ash on them, and they will stop immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the chapter of the third part: on restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is considered necessary in the art of medicine; it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations, accidents involving the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, be aware that those who boast about this chapter are foolish doctors and the unlearned, and those who for any length of time have not regarded the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is done that this method of the scientists in our land is private; and I have not forgotten any of it for any length of time; and I have not adopted what follows without extensive reading of the books of the Ancients and studying to understand them, extracting the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And thus I directed my efforts toward experimentation and study throughout the duration of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter everything that my science and experience contain; now I condense this for you to spare you the burden of lengthiness; and abbreviate this at the end of abbreviation; and demonstrate this at the end of explanation; and present various forms of instruments used in it, as is done by addition of explanation, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	A summary and collection of the essentials concerning fractures of bones, from which a preliminary understanding is necessary before we begin the recollection of the parts of fractured limbs and their various treatments.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us proceed with the prologue of this chapter by summarizing the essence of the discourse. The chapters that follow will require the craftsman and student to stand firm in the truth of these matters; thus, you and those like you who wish to know or learn this noble art must be prepared.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore, I say that when it happens to someone to suffer a fracture, dislocation, twist, or fall, at that moment it is necessary for you to begin either with phlebotomy or bandaging the injured person, or both simultaneously, unless some cause prohibits this, such as weakness of constitution, if the one who has been affected is an infant, old and decrepit, or if it is a time of extreme heat or intense cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And therefore, let the patient be content with food that is light, such as fresh herbs and the meat of birds and small animals; we prohibit heavy meats and foods that fill the body excessively, and all foods that cause the veins to swell with blood, until you are assured of the safety from abscesses, and if you do not fear an effusion of matter into the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And now return the patient to their usual regimen that they were accustomed to follow.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And as the broken bone begins to be restored, it is then necessary for the patient to be fed with nutritious foods that are rich and heavy in consistency, such as those made from boiled wheat with water, rice, beans, cow's stomachs, eggs, fresh meat, and similar items. With this regimen, the healing of the fracture occurs more easily and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that the bones in children and young people and in the elderly cannot be set or consolidated according to their nature by drying out the limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are set and consolidated according to their nature for a long time by drying out those limbs, and similarly set and consolidated are those that remain in the end of their softness, just as the bones of small infants.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature adjusts and applies them over the broken bone from all parts for some cause similar to glue, in which there is a thickness that adheres and strengthens it as they are conjoined together, until they come to an end of strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, without any cause prohibiting it from performing its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary that the patient abstains from foods that are heavy, viscous, and thick, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The variety of fractures depends on the variety of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the kinds of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the bone of the skull is different from a fracture of the bone of the arm; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the leg; and similarly all other members are different among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I wish to provide a recapitulation of every kind of fracture, explained in its own separate chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	The variety of fractures within themselves.  
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And there are diverse types of fractures in the bones; for one kind of curved fracture is different from those that occur in the stars; and some are made according to the length of the bone: and so the fractures of the skull and star-shaped and non-star-shaped, just as it is done when a pen is prepared to write, and there is a fracture with a stripe and disruption on the head, and there is a small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And each kind has its own torment proper in the restoration of the second, which will come as a reminder of the distinct ones in their places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Mark the signs of a bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this, a bone fracture is known: it is the twisting of the bone, and from its prominence and appearance to the touch, and also when you press on it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when there is no apparent twisting in its place or sound, and it does not cause significant pain upon gentle touch when you touch the bone with movement and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	There might be twisting or a small fissure, so do not press on it with your hand and by compression of all means; instead, apply one of the medicines about which there is a reminder at that moment when you deem it necessary for the location; and it may be tight due to subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that the place where it is curved and not split into two or more parts as happens in the skull, as is described throughout its comparison, now you should begin from your time to correct it whenever an abscess occurs.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess occurs in the wound, immediately do not delay it for any days until the abscess ceases; and then clean it according to each method that you can by lightness and ingenuity.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration of it and alignment of it is easier than that of the bone in which such a fracture occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen it according to what will come to your recollection.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if the bone is fractured, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from both ends, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two ropes or one rope and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And place yourself in such a position that you can put the limb in a proper position according to its natural figure, while the parts that are extended from the broken member, then force yourself to return those adductions with skill and according to each method that you can into their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful according to your strength that no harm comes to the patient because of your operation or injury; and strive according to your ability that you apply one bone to its companion bone according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is necessary that at that opportune moment you apply your hand effectively, and if you encounter any different cause, correct that and adjust it according to the extent of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive extension and compression, just as some foolish surgeons often cause an abscess in the wound by their operation, or cause contraction in the limb as we have seen from their misguided actions.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	In attaching this, in proximity to the equating and proper operation and constriction of that limb, and rest and tranquility; warn the patient about this and make them avoid anything that might disturb him during his waking hours and while he sleeps, and watch his movements and agitation, and attend to his excretion, and observe all his actions with full attention; and wait until the position of the limb is such that it ensures relief from pain, which cause is because when in the disposition of the limb's positioning there is pain or injury; at times it is necessary to change that to another position in which he does not feel pain; and guard against this so that its position be straight and equal, so that tortuosity does not occur to the limb when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the constriction of the calm limb is what I recommend; for you to know that broken limbs vary in their smallness and largeness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small such as the arm and the hand and the finger and similar to these, it is necessary that the wrapping be of soft fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But for those that are large such as the thigh or the chest, it is necessary that their wrapping be leather and hard, because the leather binding connects the large limb and strengthens it on all sides with equal constriction, thus preventing any injury.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, after the proper evacuation of the constriction, to pause conveniently for this, on the site of the fracture with three wrappings or four according to what the limb requires; and tighten your hand slightly with the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then go to the upper part of the most prominent site of the fracture, and tighten moderately so that your constriction does not hurt the place where you have tightened the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	From around the fracture, extend the bandage a little, and gradually loosen the tightness, until you take from it a large part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Take another bandage and wrap it again around the fractured area with the wrapping, and then bring the wrappings down below the fracture; and your procedure should be in tightening the bandaging and loosening it as we have said about the first wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Then pause between the wrappings with a piece of linen or cloth equal to the curvature of the fracture if there is curvature; and if not, do not pause for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Then pause on the other bandage, and then apply plasters properly made immediately if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area, and at that time pause where the abscess is and where the inflammation is; and leave it like this for several days; and then you will strengthen it with the plasters.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the plasters be half a cubit wide in length, and well formed wisely; or let them be made of pine wood; or from palm leaves; and let the width of each plaster be according to this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the plaster that is placed over the fracture should be slightly thicker and longer than the others, and the length of the plaster according to how it fits the limb in size; then reinforce the plasters with another bandage as per your initial tightening; then tie it above properly as we have said about tightening, and it should be your tightening most near the fracture site more tightly, and the further away from the fracture, the less tight it should be.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And let the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and let them be soft; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen some foolish people use cords made of hair for their threads, it is a great mistake, when one considers the need for equality in tension.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And similarly, very fine threads are not suitable either, for you will not achieve the desired tension with them, and it is necessary that there be at least one digit between each needle.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient complains of pain at the ends of the threads near the ligature in those places, then pause and use thread made of lion's wool or carded lamb's wool until it does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes a fracture occurs due to a blow, and there is disruption in the bone, and I will recall this case in that chapter in the second section.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not every broken member should be set with threads on the first day; the reason for this is that when the member is large, it should not be set with threads but after about five or seven days, or more, according to your certainty regarding the danger of an abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of plasters with which the Ancients treated fractures, dislocations, and twists, which were applied over injuries.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of making a plaster for the quick restoration of fractures, suitable for various conditions and especially for women and children, as it does not generate heat or irritation: take powdered flour, which is the fine residue that settles on the walls of the mill after grinding.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And confine it as it is, but sift it through white cloth, and stop the compounding of it not thin nor subtle; and then use it.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method for plaster to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: recipe of asafetida, of cerate, of acacia, of inula, and migraach, which is the rind of wild millet, of each one drachm; of myrrh and aloes each one half drachm; alochil two drachms; all should be thrice sifted and mixed with water or with white cloth if the composition is hot; and then use this plaster, for it is good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and confine the patient to movement.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method for a plaster to treat fractures and twists: recipe of migraach and root of white mullein one drachm; myrrh and aloes each half drachm; acacia six drachms; Armenian bole two drachms.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All should be thrice triturated in a mortar with a concave shape, and should be sifted, and should be compounded with water or white cloth if the composition is hot, and it should be administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method for plaster for joints and bones that have moved from their places, and for accidental pain in them and for splits and fractures: take pure wool and immerse it in sour wine and hot oil and apply it to the location.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	Moreover, in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, but it is good for treating abscesses and properly expelling pains.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method for a plaster that restores a broken bone: take fresh leaves of the fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; crush them together and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of preparing a quick plaster for administration during the restoration of a bone fracture and when you want resolution of the pus abscess: take rhizomes of elder, of chamomile and flowers of violets, of flour of spelt, of each one part; mix all together and boil with wine, if the member is not inflamed.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is inflamed, now mix that with cold coriander water or with water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of making a very strong plaster for resolution compared to the first one, when there is a hard abscess during the restoration of the limb: take rhizomes of elder and seeds of linseed, and pomegranate flowers, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, of each one equal part; mix all together and boil with savory water or with gentle water or with wine, whichever suits the condition of the limb and according to its repose by its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	But Hippocrates does not mention in his book that it should be paused on the broken limb during its restoration other than wax made of beeswax and oil, and he recommends that it be moderate between coarseness and fineness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	But in Wales, it is observed that they are applied to the broken limb during its restoration and for causes where there is a slight drying with warmth as well as substances like myrrh, onions, and similar to those causes which we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of preparing a plaster to relieve injury and pain: take pitch, linseed, human hair cut or bird's feathers, and elder, and salt, equal parts; mix all together, sift them, and boil, then make into a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The quantity according to which it is necessary for the bandage to remain and then be loosened is that you consider whether pain does not occur or improvement does not take place nor is the bone out of its place; therefore, do not loosen it for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if intense pain or improvement or inflammation occurs at the site, then you should be cautious or loosen it at that hour, and remove the plaster from there.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take linen cloth and a sponge soaked in seawater, and immerse it in fresh water, then use it to wash the area until the inflammation subsides and the pain is alleviated; afterward let the limb rest for an hour; then place it on wool saturated with vinegar and oil or scented oil, and bind it there overnight until you are sure that no abscess has formed, and until the swelling of the limb has subsided, and the pain from it is relieved.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And afterward, repeat that gentle bandaging and small plaster without tightening it as much as the first time, and gently do this until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you find that the abscess, swelling, pain, and inflammation have all subsided completely, and you need a plaster and bandaging, then repeat that as you did at the beginning, similarly.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no cause arises for the limb of those we have mentioned, then do not loosen it until after three or four or ten or seven days; and in some cases all of this is left for twenty days, as you deem appropriate by loosening the bandage, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and the flesh coagulates over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	At this time adjust the tightening more than in your first stricture entirely, and adjust according to the thickening of the patient's flesh, as was preceded by the recollection of it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	But if you see the site of the fracture already drying and becoming more exposed than is necessary, then you will know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching it; and therefore apply to it a plaster with vinegar which you should always replace whenever it dries out; and do this for all three days; and loosen the bandage slightly, and by this operation direct nutrition to the member, and it is healed quickly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But what those foolish restorers of the fractured member do otherwise when it is not restored at the beginning as necessary, and is restored according to its tortuosity, is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if there were a judge, this would be greatly enlarged in the Ancients' books and recognized as such.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do this, which is why it is more reasonable that they should not do so.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter second: On fracture when it occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures are caused by the impact of an object, and the impact removes all the bone within the skull, which is behind the bone, just as it would in wood, and thus this type is named a schiña; or the object incises some part of the bone, and cuts into the flesh but does not penetrate beyond that point; and this species of fracture is called absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	This is about the injury of these two fractures, either it is great or small, and of the fracture that is comminuted or crushed; and the cause of them is impact with poor ground or falling on stone, and things similar to this.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating, which approaches the peritoneum below the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the injury of these two fractures is either great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of the fracture that is weakened in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair-like structures, and for this reason this particular type of fracture is named capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is caused either by falling or by the impact of a stone and similar actions, which causes some fragments of the bone to enter into the soft tissues, and it occurs in the concave location just as it happens with ribs when they are impacted and broken inwardly into the surrounding tissues.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this is more commonly caused in the bones of children's bodies, just as it happens with the heads of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And for all these types of fractures, treatments are used, which are remedies applied separately.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will return to the recall of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And you will recognize all these types of fractures by detection on them and by inquiry into their symptoms and the appearance of damaged flesh that is over them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary fracture is recognized by this: it appears on the bone, and when it is cleaned and examined with a probe, the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fracture consider at the beginning the symptoms of the patient, and if you see by the symptoms that it signifies clearly from fear, as is vomiting of bile, and extension, and loss of understanding, and hoarseness of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and such like of the symptoms in the major dispositions, without doubt it is not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see unusual symptoms that give hope of health, then you begin the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause of which is known when it comes to you as a condition in the beginning as it is a condition and this is on the days of winter, then it is necessary that you study the nature of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all dispositions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is on the days of summer, then it is necessary that you expose the bone before the seventh day, knowing that what is around the bone may become corrupted by pus, and that symptoms which we have recounted may occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the dura mater covering the brain and is in small pieces and abrasions, then it is necessary that you excise the comminuted and abraded part, as I shall relate to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you shave the head of the patient who is afflicted, and uncover the bone according to custom and method as best you can according to the shape of the injury, and that it be clear on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you that the detection of the bone, bleeding, or abscess requires caution, then you must proceed with what is necessary, which is to apply the area with cloths infused in wine and rose oil, and let the wound rest until the abscess is subdued, and you are sure there is no further bleeding; then begin the circumvention of the bone and its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	In this way it should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one method is that you incise the bone with an incisor of such a shape, and this is its form: And then apply another incisor, this one slightly wider than the previous one; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then apply an even wider incisor than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is necessary to have several different incisors, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than the others, and their tips should be sharp, made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease during percussion on the incisors so that you do not damage the head and tip of them.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is hard and strong, it is necessary to drill around it before you apply the incisors with the chisels, which are called non-profound chisels.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are called this because these do not reach the depth of the bone of the head as far as what is adjacent to it; therefore, the chisel has a rounded tip or margin above which is like a small circle or margin that prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take many of these chisels, each of which should be suitable for the thickness of each bone, so that you have present in all parts of the head an end that is sharp, with a quantity in length and shortness according to the thickness of this part.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the form of three kinds of probes: The quality of piercing around the broken bone is that you place the probe on the bone and revolve it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the probe to another spot, and insert it throughout to a depth equal to the thickness of the shaft or about there.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then incise with an instrument what is between each piece of the bone, and make that pus as fine as you can at the end for lightness, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, or by your hand, or by some other cause through disturbances which you will have prepared for this purpose, such as probes and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And it is necessary that you guard with all caution that the incisor does not touch any part of the wound.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And so when you have perforated around the bone, and it will be separated from the wound if it is continuous there, and you will extract that, then rasp and smooth that in the roughness of the place where it is in the bone with another tool similar to an incisor, but it must be softer and finer than other incisors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any part of the small broken bones remains and you are struggling with it, now take that with ease using what is at hand among your tools; and then treat the wound with lint and dressings as we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is light, distant from fear, which Guilla and the lauzec praise greatly; and this is the speech about it: It is necessary for you at the beginning to start uncovering the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most severe and obvious, until when you have uncovered that part and you have placed below it the extremity of this slow and cheerful incisor, which has this form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And so the lens-shaped part is solid and does not divide for any cause, and the sharp part divides it into two parts lengthwise, as often happens; that the lens-shaped part fit to the suture with the dividing surface sharp on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And therefore, you strike upon the sutures of a part with a small hammer so that you divide all the bone easily as it is revolved, and you be sure of the periosteum so that no accident happens in any way, and if the surgeon were the most foolish of all men and the least knowledgeable among them; certainly, and if he were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Now if there is any cause attached to the bone of the periosteum in some places of bone, it will divide that which is near the end of the lens-shaped suture, and it will separate easily, for it separates without harm or fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the periosteum, and that which is separated or remains of the bone is its surface, and it remains in roughness and small protrusions, now you should shave off that roughness and eradicate those protrusions with fine razors for which you have prepared different quantities so that you can administer those most suitable for each location and most appropriate according to how your operation leads on that broken bone and the shape of it.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you should administer according to your proportion at which you shave the bone initially with the widest of those razors, and then gradually use the finer ones, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the thinnest and finest of all of them.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But in each of the other small, hairline fractures and subtle fractures, you should administer care according to what is needed for the correction of them.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is not surprising that they are not amazed by all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And this concerns what we have written about the great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the fat is rectangular when you remove the bone, then cover it with a piece of cloth according to the size of the wound, and immerse that in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; and then take another folded or triple-layered piece of cloth and immerse it in vinegar and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth, doing this as gently as possible so as not to disturb the tissue; and then apply a linen bandage, but do not wrap it tightly except just enough to cover the wound.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave it like this for one day or two until you are sure of the condition of the abscess; and then untie it and administer medicines that relieve excessive dryness, such as linseed poultice and flour of oats, and powder of vetches and of aristology, and similar remedies.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you should make these medicines into a powder that is finely ground and applied to the wound when they are dry; and generally, administer any medicine whose property is to cleanse without irritating.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And act according to your virtue so that the wound in your treatment remains clean; do not let it become infected or worsen; and do not allow its virulence to increase. For when it is properly applied to the fat of the brain, it corrupts it, weakens it, and leads to further illness due to this malevolent condition.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it affects the tissue of the head, as when the bone is cleansed and especially when the treatment of it is postponed, there appears a blackness on its surface; and therefore consider whether it leads to the illnesses we have mentioned, for then you should be wary without any doubt.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if the blackness does not come from medicine that was applied above it, but rather due to the virtue of that medicine which caused the blackness, then you should take one part honey and three parts olive oil, and with these anoint a cloth, and immediately apply that over the wound; and afterward treat it with the spices appropriate for healing until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken into more than two main parts, or occasionally just one of them, because there are two bones in it; the lower part is cartilaginous and does not break, but only becomes bruised, swollen, and distorted.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you should insert your little finger into the side of the nose, and adjust that fracture with your finger inside, and hold it in place externally until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this with ease, and be careful that your operation does not cause pain to the patient.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then you should use the tip of a probe with some thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should proceed as described above.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And attempt the restoration of it on the first day of the fracture if possible; and if not, then wait until the seventh or tenth day when the swelling has subsided.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Approach the end of the nose with a piece of linen cloth if the fracture is in one piece, or use two pieces if the fracture is in two parts, and let each piece be thick enough to fill the groove of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	Some of the ancient restorers say that the cloths should be dipped in butter and changed every day, but I have not seen this done; however, it is advisable to dip the cloth in egg whites mixed with powdered sugar, and then place the cloth on until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And in some cases, a piece of leather wrapped in linen should be inserted into the nose instead of cloths, if the fracture of the nose is more severe and the patient is not prohibited from breathing through it.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this method is not necessary for you; if you prefer, do this, and if you prefer, use cloths.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another situation arises requiring cauterization, apply a plaster to the nose with pitch or wax dipped in vinegar and rose oil, or with cerate.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if cauterization is not necessary, then you should apply a plaster outside with sesame flour and powdered herbs mixed with egg whites; place it over a piece of linen, and do not cover the nose with anything.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or crushed, then you should cut around them and extract them using instruments suitable for that purpose; then close the gap and treat it with substances that promote healing and consolidation, and use appropriate plasters.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if it happens that plague befalls the nose, now you must treat it with poultices and administer lead tubes inside until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the lower jaw is broken and the fracture does not have inflammation, observe now whether the fracture is only outwardly displaced, and it is not broken into two pieces and curved inward, then its diagnosis is easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And what you must do, if the fracture is on the right side, is to insert your left thumb into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert your right thumb; and press with it inside the swelling of the fracture outwardly with ease using your other hand from outside the bone; do this gently.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then you must administer extension of both parts according to straightness as much as possible until they are aligned.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if it happens that the teeth are knocked out due to a disruption, then strengthen those of which you expect them to break with a thread of gold or silver or silk; and immediately apply a cloth on the broken jaw, and then place it on a doubled cloth, and place on it a bandage properly made, or a piece of softened leather equal in length to the jaw; and then tie it above as is convenient for you to secure the binding and appropriate application, so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And he commands the patient to use rest and tranquility, and to pause from eating liquid foods.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you find that the shape has already been altered in any way, then on the third day you should apply heat and loosen it; and afterward, correct what has already been altered with powder of myrtle, egg white, or flour of chickpeas, after you have removed the cerate from it, and place over the dressing a piece of linen.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then when it is attached and adjusted to the plaster on it, and the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it so that you do not loosen it until it is healed and the fracture is strengthened; for in about three weeks this fracture usually becomes strong.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if an abscess occurs at another time, then administer what we have said should be done during the treatment until it is healed, and allow that abscess to drain.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is with a splinter, then consider whether it is a piece of bone separated or stuck, and you should carefully remove those splinters with what is appropriate for removing them using the instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the splinter is narrow, then you should enlarge it with a scalpel according to the amount necessary for your needs.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then when you have removed those splinters, and none of them will drain by itself, close the opening of the splinter if it is wide; and if not, place one of the dressings that are appropriate for this on it to promote healing until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 4
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the collarbone when it is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Most often the collarbone is fractured in the part in front of the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	For it is either broken, or separated, or separated into two parts without the occurrence of displacement; and it is easy for its restoration. Or it happens with displacement, and its restoration is difficult; or it happens that the fracture is along the surface.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is along the surface, is that you should have two assistants present, so that one holds the splint and supports the broken collarbone, and the other extends the arm to that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then mold the fracture with the fingers so that it is shaped as needed, and there should be neither a small prominence nor a depression.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then place under the armpit of the injured side a pad made of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to your necessity; extend and elevate the collarbone and compress the pad with your hand so that you can mold the fracture as needed.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the end of the collarbone to the outer parts, so that it reaches the clavicle, then have the patient lie on their shoulder, and place under the muscle a pad about half as large.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant presses the muscle below so that the bone of the collarbone is elevated to meet the clavicle, and then you should correct the fracture and mold it with your fingers as needed.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel pain from the furcula and its maladies, now you must cut into it and extract those pains with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, now you must devise an incision with one of the instruments that you have prepared for this purpose, since you paused below the furcula the tool that serves as a pick; and this tool is made of wood or iron and has the following form:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a bowl of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to what you need from it, depending on the size of the bone or the scarcity of the space.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; let there be two ends as you see fit, and one end should be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when extracting the pain from the bone is wide, and you are sure it will form an abscess, now you must bring the two lips of the wound together with a suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear it may form an abscess, now you should treat the wound with plasters and powders according to the quantity of the wound's incision.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess does occur, now apply a plaster made of green vegetables and rose oil mixed with vinegar, and place it over the area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	But the immobilization of the bone when it is in a wound and section, is that you place a plaster made of flour mixed with egg white, and put it on the affected area, and then place a sphere under the swelling if needed, and then take bandages, which are like what the Saracens use, about as long as one palm or around that size; and then place double powders over the affected area and plaster; and then take a thin board of approximately three fingers in width and similarly long; and then wrap it in cloth, and then wrap this cloth around the board at the location above the fracture site; and then apply bandages as they are rolled, and roll them from the neck and under the swelling and below the fracture point, and reduce it over all parts, and when you see that the immobilization of the fracture is properly set, and that is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And do not let the splint press down on the broken bone; and therefore it is necessary that you see the patient every day, so that when the bandage has loosened or you see the splint already moved, then you must correct this and tighten the binding.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And place the patient's pillow on their neck, and place beneath it a small roll to elevate the support of their back, so that when the fracture of the collarbone is elevated by the muscles, or the arm is bandaged to the neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the bandage unless an abscess occurs in the vicinity or within xii days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you see that the face of it needs it, and adjust it to the constriction and restore it until it is restored and the collarbone fracture is healed.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is tightened and comforted according to the measure in xxviii days, and in some cases it is done in less time for some people.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The shoulder blade is broken in the middle and not shattered but only cracked at the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when it is broken in that place — and it is broken in the middle — and it is known only by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture prepare yourself and reduce it according to its natural shape in every way that is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then pause over the place where you sprinkle powdered egg white and stop there; and then pause over the doubled cloth; and then pause over the sieve, taking a small amount of powder according to the quantity of the spoon all or at most a little.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if you leave the sieve with a hollow in some part of the spoon, then you fill that hollow with cloth and then press the sieve according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then apply pressure above with a metallic hook of appropriate length and with firmness to the sieve so that it does not move from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And examine the bandage each day; and every time it is softened, change it on another day and tighten it and adjust the sieve if it has moved from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And place the dressing on its side as is appropriate.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spoon is restored in xx days or in .xxv. 
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	When this number is complete, then you dissolve the bandage, and you know for certain which are the bones of which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed with the piece of bone and place the chain underneath it, then you cut above it, remove it, and do as we have said regarding the fracture of the collarbone or abscess cauterization if this occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of a foot fracture.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot sometimes is broken in the middle and remains there; but the ends move as cicadas do, moving separately and apart.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the conditions when the middle of it is broken, it is that it inclines towards the internal parts and there occurs great pain, difficulty in movement, coughing, fever, vomiting blood; and it is evident in the cavity of the broken bone and not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient be laid supine on their bed, and place a cushion between their shoulders; then gently press the muscles, and adjust the ribs by bringing together more than two ribs, and carefully perform the operation and adjustment in every possible way suitable for this, until the figure of the bone returns as required.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place over it a plaster and cotton, and place beneath it thin splints of wood or reeds or something similar in lightness, after which you wrap that in cloth; then gently bind that over the broken bone without putting too much pressure; and go around the binding several times along the back, and tighten that with appropriate firmness; and then examine the bandage at all times, and when it becomes loose, tighten it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity compels the removal of that which has been corroded or protruded or caused pain or an abscess in the area, then you should cut and loosen it and remove the plaster and correct what happened with this method of treatment; and immediately replace the plaster if you have to do so for that part; and adjust the tightness until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in thick parts where they meet; and at their extremities in front, such fractures do not happen because those parts are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of it is not hidden to the sense of touch during the examination of the aforementioned parts.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that it equalizes the fracture of the aforementioned parts according to the possible method, until it is set as needed, and then apply plaster and bind the broken bone with a splint if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs inclines towards the inner parts, then severe pain and piercing occur, just as in the case of one who has wept, and because of this, the bone puts pressure on the membrane; and it leads to difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this is difficult to treat.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the Ancients were skilled in that with powerful remedies.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And what they say is: it is necessary to avoid foods that cause severe inflammation and gas, so that the abdomen becomes inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed outward.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	Let us proceed with what is necessary to avoid causing unnecessary harm that might lead to the formation of an abscess by cautery, if it does not already exist; and if it has already occurred, now help with this.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them say that it should be placed above the wound and near where it draws up strength; and this is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the wound may draw the superfluities to the place due to its weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them say: cover the place with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and place poultices between the ribs until it is filled, so that the bandage fits according to its roundness; and treat the wound as you would for the cure of pleurisy with food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the wound is caused by violent constriction that cannot be tolerated, and the bone pierces through the membrane at a point, we fear for the wound; now it should be necessary to cut above the location, expose the broken rib, and then place an instrument that preserves the safety previously determined, and with ease, incise the bone and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then we adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, by stitching, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs internally, now you should incise it and apply poultices in rose oil on the area, and treat the wound with what is appropriate for an internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let them lie supine on the side on which they sleep until they are healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the cervical vertebrae and the collarbone.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	In some cases, fractures occur in the bones of the collar, and treatment for them is similarly applied to the vertebrae of the spine.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, at that moment consider: if you see their limbs already softened, numb, and dead, and they cannot move or stretch them, and when you press on those areas with your fingers or pierce them with a needle and there is no feeling of pain, then you understand that they are not going to recover, and in such conditions it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you move those limbs and feel constriction when pressing on them and piercing them with a needle, then you understand that the vertebra is safe and that the patient will recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if the vertebrae of the neck show similar symptoms and you want to know whether they will recover or not, then observe their breathing.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	At this point, if you see that they are already weakened and the condition affecting them is similar to what happens in their limbs, and shortly after lying on their back, they experience vomiting and involuntary defecation, and sometimes they lie on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you understand that it is fatal, and at that moment there is no need to work on treating them.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of those symptoms occur, then the cause is better and farther from being fatal.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for them is to apply a poultice to reduce the abscess on the affected vertebra. Place over it, at times, rose oil or boiled linseed; place this over it several times until the abscess is reduced.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	During the hours, apply one of the comfortable and stimulating plasters, and place it over that area; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the side where there is pain until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that the bone is bruised or for some cause has already become separated from it, then place a cloth over the wound and remove that bone; and immediately adjust the two lips of the wound, using stitches if it is large; and thereafter treat it with one of the ingredients of the remedies until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the tip of the bone is broken and it is the end of the limb, then place your finger of the left hand in the buttock, and align the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible by second-degree reduction; and thereafter apply a plaster and splint to it, if you need those, and secure it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel bruised and broken bones in it, then act on that, remove them, and treat the wound with the treatment that has been prescribed until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the broad (area).
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the broad areas are often broken, and if they break, then the fracture in them is only communication at the extremities of those bones and they split along their length and incline to the sides; and the patient experiences pain in that location and puncture, and the movement is restricted when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it until it aligns with the figure of the fracture.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is at the extremity of the limb, then you should apply padding according to what seems appropriate to you by way of equalization until it resembles its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	And if the fracture is in the long bone that inclines towards the lower parts, then you should have the patient lie on their back so that you may prepare for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have padded that, place an emplaster over it, and then place over that a splint of wood or cane, and bind with bandages in such a way that you do not fear any point of the fracture nor movement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And pad the concavity with what fills that space until it takes the binding according to equality, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	And if an abscess occurs suddenly, then you should stop the extension of the limb and its restoration until the abscess is brought under control, and apply what soothes it as has been done previously; and then return to the restoration of the limb, and bind it as is appropriate.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if you encounter crushed or comminuted bones, then you must treat them accordingly.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the adjunct (note: "adjutori" may refer to a specific part or bone, possibly translated as "auxiliary bone" or a supporting structure, depending on the context). For precise translation, more context would be helpful, but based on the text, it refers to the restoration of a fracture involving an auxiliary or supportive bone.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjunct is what is between the shoulder blade and the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which the first is that you take smooth wood of medium thickness in this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And let it be held in two places by threads, and let it be suspended from a high place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And let the patient lie on a stool; and then lay the broken arm over the wood until it reaches the midpoint where the curve of the wood is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend something heavy on that, or the patient will extend it to the lower parts; and then the physician should place the fracture with its sides upwards until the fracture returns to its proper position.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient lies supine on their back and suspend the arm at the neck with a thread; then command two assistants, one to hold above the fracture with its upper part, and the other to hold below it; each should extend it in their direction.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then tie threads above and below the fracture, and each of the two assistants should pull in their respective directions.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then it is necessary to place half of the thread over the midpoint and the other part below the fracture towards the joint.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is near the joint, then it is necessary to place the thread over that location and above the joint.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Take that [wound or incision] with ease and work on it, and as soon as it is well healed according to what is needed, then strengthen it if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if an abscess does occur, then loosen the stitches internally on the seventh day, and place over it a sponge soaked in vinegar and rose water until the abscess subsides, and then you can strengthen it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method of strengthening it is to apply a plaster over the fracture, and then place a bandage of wet cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm on that support, and place its hand upon its own muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and strengthen it over the support for the arm so that the arm is in a position of stability, if there is no cause prohibiting this from the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And now use a splint.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you place on the fracture a splint that is thicker and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers from all sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen it on the splints with the bandaging method that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your bandaging over the site of the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is longer, the bandaging should be lighter.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so, when you see the situation of the splints and the bandaging as we have said during the time when you restore the limb to its proper position, then you should proceed accordingly.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess, apply caustic on the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And for this reason, consider bandaging all parts for three days so that nothing happens in the place of swelling or inflammation; or food should not reach the member due to excess tension; and thus correct everything as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not loosen the bandage for at least three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient lie on their back, and their head should be raised to rest on their shoulders so that it is above the stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place a padding filled with wool over the helper, and at all times of the night or day ensure that the figure of the broken limb is not loosened or dissolved, nor should the bandage be too slack; thus correct this with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And give the patient food according to the order we mentioned earlier, such that the food is light at the beginning until healing starts; and then it is appropriate to gradually increase the quantity of food.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	For the usual practice regarding the splint and bandage is that they should be tight for forty days; and then it is appropriate to loosen them, administer a bath, and treat with ointments that correct this.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is rough and irritated, then do not loosen the bandage and splints for several days or even up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of the restoration of a fracture of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna; of which one is small, and it is the one that lies under the wrist, and the other is large and is placed below the small one, towards the lower part.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And often it happens that only the larger ulna is fractured, or the smaller one, and frequently both are broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller ulna is fractured above, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is quicker.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the ulna is fractured below, the fracture is severe, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is fractured is the smaller ulna above, then it is appropriate for the physician, during its restoration, to allow a small extension with ease until it is bandaged.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the larger ulna is the one that is fractured, then it is necessary to allow more vigorous extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both ulnas are broken together, then it is necessary to allow the most vigorous extension.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And it is necessary to place the figure of the hand during its restoration and extension stretched out on a cushion, with the wrist of the hand at the upper parts, as mentioned before, and the thumb be lower than the other fingers, and the patient lie resting on a soft bed.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And let a cushion be placed under him on one side or the other, so that the patient does not have to work.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And let one minister extend the limb to be operated from below by the waist or with a bandage, and another minister extend it similarly from above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And let the surgeon then adjust the bone into place as best he can according to its proper shape.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the setting of the bone you find any protrusions, then you must reduce all parts to their proper place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if a protrusion appears separated from the rest that prevents healing and is not to your hope for the restoration of the patient, then you should act upon it and remove that part according to the method we have described above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is due to infection, I have already treated this in a separate chapter, so follow the treatment described there.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration process, then apply a cloth dipped in wax made from olive oil and white beeswax, which should be between thick and thin consistency. Place a strong bandage over it with gentle pressure to allow the abscess to subside; then remove the wax and apply a plaster prepared from powdered herbs mixed with egg whites, and subsequently place linens; let the linen placed over that fracture be farther and tighter.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of bandages for the arm varies in major treatments, or rather when the fracture is in one bone or in two bones simultaneously.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then apply your bandaging over the site of the fracture tightly and forcefully. When more strain is placed on the parts above or below the fracture, apply the bandaging a bit looser according to the preceding instructions at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The cloths with which you wrap the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the bandage that is applied should be of medium thickness between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and the bandaging after several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises for which adjustment is necessary, such as inflammation that occurs in the limb, you should immerse the limb in hot water until the swelling subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And do not constrain the limb until it rests, and then resume the bandaging.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the bandaging has already been loosened and the bone is in a similar condition, then adjust everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And be careful if the nutrition is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive bandaging, for then you should loosen it slightly and leave it for several days so that nutrition can reach it, and then tighten it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if the patient does not suffer from any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to remove the bandaging for about twenty days or thereabouts.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then suspend the arm of the patient due to their skill in moving it actively, and have them lie on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-two days, or sometimes it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the condition of the tissues and the skill of the practitioner.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fractures of the bone of the hand and the fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that in the bones of the hand and the joints of the fingers, when there is a fracture, it rarely affects them unless after many days.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when a fracture or dislocation occurs in the hand, it is necessary that the patient lie flat and on a hard surface, and place the hand upon it extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the assistant should extend the broken bones, and the physician should ensure that they are properly aligned.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And now it is necessary to apply a plaster and wool padding, unless an abscess requires cauterization; then place a board above according to the size of the area, and you should have wrapped that in cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the fracture is in the parts inside the palm, then make it appear as a sphere of cloth, and instruct the patient to hold that with their injured palm; then wrap it tightly with cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the board should be made of wood and wrapped in cloth in which it is raised, so that the surface fits the palm; then wrap it as needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	But if the fracture is in the parts outside, then place a board above and another below in the palm, so that the hand is supported and straight; then apply the bandage, as if rotating the hand at the wrist between the fingers with ligaments.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if it happens that there is a fracture in one of the bones mentioned, then immediately the said bone should be straightened according to what is necessary and placed upon the palm, and if you wish, place under it a small straight splint so that the fracture is elevated and not injured.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	And if the fracture is in any of the others mentioned, such as in the middle bone, or in the index finger, or in the ring finger, then it should be straightened and placed on the affected finger; or all should be laid out in sequence, which is better; or place it over that small splint, as we have said about the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration and subsequently, the disposition of abscesses and opposing conditions — during your operation — according to what is necessary when any cause of those occurs, as it is repeated in the narration.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of a fracture of the bone of the forearm.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone of the forearm, when fractured, is felt and revealed to the sense according to how it has moved apart and to the side.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done in such a way that one bandage is stretched over the fracture and another bandage below the fracture, and the patient lies prone on their stomach and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And subsequently, the minister should extend all the bandages to their position according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is closer to the wrist of the forearm, then the bandage should be extended towards the palm at the position of the metacarpal, so that the extension reaches there, and the other bandage below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if the fracture is near the knuckle, then at this time bind it to the knuckle, and extend it to the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the surgeon should equalize the bone on both sides but ensure that it is reduced according to its natural appearance and the bone is joined by good union; now it is necessary to apply a plaster and bandage, unless an abscess occurs in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if an abscess occurs, then you should leave it for several days until the abscess subsides, and afterward return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandaging should be done as follows: you must wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, and fold it two or three times, and remove the excess; then wrap the limb so that it reaches to the ankle and the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long strip of cloth between the thigh and the limb near the joint at the parts below, and let the ends of the cloth extend from the uppermost part of both sections, and then wrap around the limb and the thigh what remains of the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place strips of metal over the thigh at the location of the fracture, and place one strip over the bone of the limb.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the spaces between the limb and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the bandaging is compacted.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin a strong bandaging over the location of the fracture with three or four wraps, and as you move away from the site of the fracture with the bandage, your wrapping should become lighter and looser and softer.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	From there extend to the two extremities of the vein to the parts below until it reaches the navel cavity, and strengthen both the extremities of the stitches on the other side so that the ligature is not loosened from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then lay the structure over that, so it is such that corrosion or abscess does not occur in the member nor swelling and similar things; and if any cause of those should happen, immediately cut away what is damaged and correct it right away as we have said many times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if in the bone there is a piece of bone that needs to be placed, then try to align it as best you can; and if not, fix it in place and do not move it, and care for what precedes the healing until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And at times this fracture of the rib is strengthened by stitching it to another part in the same way as we have said about the assistant and the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But in the restoration of the limb in such a manner that no bad lameness occurs to the patient; and if it is restored alone or another chamber is applied to it, then it is necessary that the patient limp permanently.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the rib is strengthened in forty days or a few more months, and all of this depends on the diversity of constitutions and other circumstances.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the thumb bone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the fracture of the thumb bone often occurs at the base, but it happens many times near the joint.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If it happens that you encounter a fracture, at that moment it is nothing but a split or injury to its parts, and this is in one side or six sides, and on this everything stands as feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it consists in putting together what is broken of its parts as they are inside, so that it may be added and joined according to what is possible by equation, ease, and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply a plaster and place it over that round bandage if you need one; and strengthen above the constriction as is appropriate.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the positions which we have recommended for other fractures, as well as abscesses and similar conditions, in such a way that you oppose every accident accordingly until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the fracture of the hip.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the hip there are two bones of which one is thick and is named the hip bone; and the other is slender and is called the femur.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And if any of the types of fracture occur to these two bones as occurs to the two bones of the arm, and by this restoration is made in the same way as the restoration of the arm, and the operation for it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if you break both bones together, the hip is affected in all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the more slender bone is broken, the hip is affected in the forward parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if you cut into the bone that is thicker, feel for its surface, and be cautious of those causes which could harm you.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer the extension, alignment, and binding of the bones according to that measurement.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, be careful if the fracture of the skull is hard and uneven; then the extension should be gentle and slower, and use your utmost caution.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And when there is any cause for an operation on the skull, and when you align the bones and complete all of the work involved in the procedure, at that time you will take pieces of wood from a tree that has thick fibers under its bark; these should be made similarly to palm branches. Choose those with slight roughness, not grooved like fingers, and their length should match the length of the skull, leaving an inch inside.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap around each piece of cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one over the front part of the skull on one side, and the other on the opposite side, leaving an inch inside at the base of the head.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then bind the two bones in three places at both ends and in the middle, for with this structure the skull is prevented from tilting to either side and remains in proper position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And now a piece of wood has been administered according to the length of the skull; and it should be placed in such a way that the skull can still move slightly.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And it is especially important that you do this in the case of a fracture, and when it is properly diagnosed as such.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And so on each day consider the wound and study it according to that last study, and you guard it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any such cause occurs, then act upon what is needed for it to be healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the heel bone and of the bones of the foot and of the aforementioned.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	A complete fracture does not often occur in the heel bone; but fractures sometimes happen to the bones of the foot. Few fractures occur to the aforementioned bones of the foot, and they do not usually occur there except in cases of disposition [for such injuries].
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if a fracture occurs to the bones of the foot and those bones become elevated above each other, then the patient should rest their foot on prepared ground in such a manner.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then rest one foot on what is elevated by those bones, and then press on them, and bind them until they return to their proper place.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply a plaster and place it above, and below the arch of the foot place a small board with two flat ends.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then bind that to the foot in a proper position, since you have wrapped it with cloths and for other necessary reasons.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones bound together, or joined, or dislocated, and the operation on these is as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if any of them are joined together, then separate them and bind them as I have recommended to you in the restoration of those of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Take a piece of wood and shape it according to the length of the finger, and make it slightly thicker at one end; then place this tool below this table as recommended to you, and tighten it with appropriate firmness.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If what is being cut involves two, three, or more bones, then place over each finger a stick of its quantity wrapped in linen cloth, and tighten the table at the base of the foot, so that it stands on one end of the table, thereby providing good support for the arch of the foot.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	It is important for you not to forget that you should consider all the causes mentioned to you in the other fractures and accidents that we have discussed; and prepare yourself for every possible situation as needed.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the fracture of the chin in women and of the pubic bone and penis in men.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the chin of a woman is fractured, then make that suture in the form of a crescent, and slightly incline it towards one side, and let it be placed behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	Then the midwife should fill the chin with cotton, and it should be placed in the chin as if it were a sphere; then gently encourage the woman to cough, and gradually elevate her head, for all of this is intended so that before long the chin will return to its proper position as if it were a sphere and the fractured bone will heal.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Then place pillows under her head, and when she needs to urinate, lift the cotton for ease and allow her to urinate, then reduce it and return it according to the method by which you initially placed it, and then return it to its original pillow.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And so it should be done for about seven days or around that time, because then it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and stretch it over the wound with a tube of cane; and insert the entire bladder into the cavity, and then blow air through the tube until the bladder is inflated inside the cavity, because the fracture returns to its place.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then fill it with pitch and keep it for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the thumb of a man or woman is broken, then administer what we have recommended for the hip bone in its restoration and alignment.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures that rarely occur, especially to one who has some study and use of understanding my book; for this fracture signifies to you in the major positions through directness in its restoration and constriction, and thus you understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the arm of a man when it is broken, take a splint made of wood, and place the arm in that; then cover it with a cloth wrap, and bind it, and leave it for three days or around that time, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of bone fractures when there is inflammation.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is appropriate for one who suffers a fracture with inflammation, and especially if the bone is large such as the thigh bone or the helper bone, or similar to that, that you apply cupping and bloodletting immediately if the conditions for bloodletting indicate it to you as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the pus flows from the wound, now is the time for you to turn your attention to the retention of the powder that you triturate and sprinkle on the wound, unless some other cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And immediately begin to restore the fracture on that very day, and do not delay it, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess occurs, now you should postpone the restoration for seven days until the abscess subsides, and do not approach it on the third day or even the fourth, for you may cause further harm.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin, now is the time for you to reduce it and equalize it with your utmost ease and with minimal extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if you are not prepared for extension and cannot equalize it with your utmost effort, now you should reduce it using this instrument; the instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight digits, and its width according to the quantity of the wound; and therefore, it is necessary for the physician to take three or four such instruments according to what is needed for the treatment in all types of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And let it be round, and let it be in slight convexity so that it does not become bent under the pressure upon it during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And let it have sharp edges at its ends, with margins on both sides; and let the upper part be thicker in tendency, and from the middle to the parts thinner.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called in Greek "voluntary palate flap", that is a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the extremity of the bandage may be laid flat, raise it above the extremity of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And impel it into a place where the bone can return to its proper position and become aligned with some fixation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And thus strive to align the ends of the fractured bones between them, and if the end of the broken bone is slender and does not take the instrument well, then you should insert the end of that bone so that the instrument has grip on it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone as we have recommended, then insert it with that which seems appropriate to you among the instruments we have mentioned; or cut it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And rasp that which remains on the bone of roughness and small ridges.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction the patient feels intense pain in the tooth, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and thus do what will provide great relief to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the bone is complete, then soak a cloth in styptic black vinegar, and if it is summer, do not place wax or any other oily substance on the wound, so that decay and corruption do not occur.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And afterwards administer poultices at the appropriate time of your bone restoration, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can insert dressings with forceps and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And guard yourself with all caution that you do not touch the plague on the fracture, for many times fools among physicians have done this to their patients, causing death or corrupting illness, which is gangrene.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the swelling is soft, lax, different from the swelling of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the swelling is large or it is bad swelling, and you fear some of the harmful accidents which we have recounted, and you feel pain in that place, then do not rest on those splints, but make an envelope of hard cloths instead of splints and apply them to it.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And as soon as one or two days have passed and the swelling begins to subside, indicating that pus has formed inside, then you remove the cloth which you had placed over it, and soon administer poultices, such as those we customarily use for treating swellings, such as tetrafarmakon and similar remedies.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage and examine the swelling every morning and evening until it is consolidated and firm, and it should be such that the pus can flow from it to the lower parts with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If several days pass and the swelling does not consolidate or pus does not begin to discharge from it, then you should know that here one must use small incisions to inquire about the condition of the swelling with a probe.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those incisions, those that are separate and can be explored and extracted, you should do so. For those from which nothing can be removed and which cause pain when the limb is moved, perforate them as much as possible according to what is feasible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if it happens that the wound is gangrenous or ulcerated, which are stinking and other kinds of corruption and putrefaction, then you should use one of those remedies with which it is convenient for the treatment of which a preceding narration is given in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And concerning that in which my speech must stand and you should present your procedure: when the bone is broken, it protrudes above the limb as does the bone of the wing and the helper and similar to those of large limbs, and do not assume traction of it, nor the extraction of it for whenever more than two weeks or three passes it causes death; therefore leave that inside which heals, for surely light it will fall out in about twenty days or thirty; and then care for the wound if you see fit, and if not, leave it as is.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of knotting that occurs in the aftermath of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	This knotting often occurs in the aftermath of the healing of a fracture, especially near the joints, and it disfigures the shape of the limb; and it significantly impedes the limb from its natural function.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider whether the knotting is recent and administer those medicines that have astringent properties such as aloes, myrrh, mastic, sarcocollo, atractylis, and similar ones; take some or all of these and combine them with vinegar or egg white or water to make a paste. Apply this paste over the knotting using a piece of linen, and secure it firmly in place with proper bandaging.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave the bandaging in place without removing it for several days; then remove it and apply another, until the knotting is reduced. Or gradually heat a lead plate over it, as lead has the property of reducing what is swollen in limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If a swelling has become hardened and turned into bone and it is narrow and causes necessity to remove it quickly, then cut it along the part where pus is most abundant, and excise the excess that protrudes or make an incision in such places as are convenient for it to be removed; and take care within so that it may heal.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of fractures when they are set and then the limb is moved gently but according to its natural movement.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a fracture is set and the limb is moved gently, it is done for various reasons: one of which is too much soaking of the bandages and binding them not as needed; or by excessive tightness of the bindings within which the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb; or by an excess of poultices; or by unnecessary movement out of its proper time; or by a lack of blood in the patient's body and weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to give food to the patient and make their body soft so that blood is multiplied in it; administer baths; and apply warm herbs and myrtle over it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then apply a plaster to the limb so that the plaster draws in nourishment, or continue poulticing it with warm water until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of broken bones when they are restored incorrectly and prevent the necessary operation on them.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens to the member that has already been restored near its healing from curvature and prominence of the broken bone and joint stiffness, and this is because of the form of the limb, but nevertheless the limb is not prevented from its natural function, then there is no need for you to accept the word of one who believes that limb to be newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But now there are many false doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is a shameful one leading to great fear, the sign of which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if limping and stiffness are recent, then they should be soaked in hot water with soft herbs such as willow bark, hawthorn leaves, and melilot; and a soothing plaster should be applied like well-made mallow; or take mucilage of marshmallow root and mix it with linseed oil or olive oil, then apply it; or soak fatty figs in pigeon dung and use similar remedies for strengthening the limbs.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And in some cases, it is dissolved through frequent gentle friction, which should be applied to the most moist areas, and movement of the limb should be administered to all parts at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if the curvature has already advanced and is hard and turned into bone and necessitates treatment with iron, then it must be that the pus above should be evacuated and the continuity of the bone should be dissolved, and that which is excessive in stiffness of that member near the bone should be cut with fine instruments, and ease should be administered to it with diligence and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On Speaking of Dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is when any of the joints loses its proper location, thus preventing movement, and the figure of the limb becomes distorted, causing severe pain and great injury.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	When a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to immediately attempt to reduce it and not delay in doing so, for if there is a delay, the joint becomes inflamed and swollen, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, it is not advisable to move or keep the patient standing during the period of inflammation, as movement often causes spasms and severe pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when this happens, it is necessary for you to prepare for the incision of the affected area, and then allow time for the inflammation to subside; afterward, the limb should be bathed in warm water and oil, and then reduction should be attempted with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And treat the entire limb with what will help it remember its proper place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And thus I have arranged the chapters on dislocation as they were previously organized for fractures; starting with the more important parts of the body and then proceeding to the lesser ones.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Lower Jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	When both jaws are dislocated, they do not move easily; the dislocation of both can occur in one of two ways: either they are partially displaced from their proper positions with some movement and slightly softened; or they are completely and fully dislocated, to the point where they are softened at the joint where saliva flows from the mouth and the patient cannot close it properly, and the tongue is covered by the soft tissue.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation of the bone is slight, it returns by itself in major positions due to slight cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and severe, it must be treated with immediate reduction, and should not be delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the minister have the patient lie down, and insert his fingers into one side of the mouth towards the site of the dislocation if the dislocation is on one side; or insert both sides with his fingers together if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers should be outside equally; and he commands the patient to cease moving their jaws and relax them so that they can move from each part; and the physician then aligns the jaw and pushes it until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated simultaneously, then administer steam with hot water and oil until the reduction can be performed gently on both sides, and do not delay the reduction of both from entirely as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they return and are properly aligned, and the patient's mouth is closed and not relaxed, then place soft cotton pads covered with wax over them, and make it from beeswax and oil softened; and afterwards bind it gently with soft bandages.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be positioned between both ears, so that it does not turn to either the right or left; and do not force them to chew for any reason; have their food be cut into small pieces, until when the pain subsides and the jaws are well healed, then allow them to chew as they wish.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	Thus it should be administered with ease, and he should not work on the opening of the mouth for eating and drinking and speaking until the jaw is healed and cured.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of both jaws when they are dislocated at any time and have not returned to their places is difficult, fevers often occur with constant sweats, and very easily the patient's belly becomes distended, and very easily he vomits pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then you know it is lost; and very often he who suffers this dies within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The collarbone is not dislocated from the chest internally due to its continuity with the ribs; and sometimes it is dislocated outward, and this is evident by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then press the area with your palm firmly, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then apply a plaster and powder to that area.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the extremity of that which connects to the neck and is continuous with it is not dislocated on any day; therefore, it must be reduced and treated as we have said and as you are prepared.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a plaster, powder, and bandaging to that area, and instruct the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the Reduction of Muscle Dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that a muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the upper part to the lower part.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	The second is when it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and this happens quickly; and it is not dislocated to the rear parts by the shoulder; nor is it dislocated to the front parts by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	It is more often dislocated and comes out below the upper part, especially in those whose flesh is thin, it dislocates easily; but in those with thick muscles, it comes out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	It often happens to some people that due to a blow or fall, their muscle becomes swollen and inflamed, and it is caused to be dislocated by this swelling.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then you should understand this while you are in charge of it, and at that moment proceed with its treatment.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation is known when it is below the upper part; thus, you can distinguish between a dislocated muscle and one that is not, as there is a clear difference between them. You will find a concavity at the top of the muscle below the upper part upon touching its head as if it were hollow, and the affected person cannot move their hand to their ear or perform any other movement with it.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, you should place the foot above, and you will immediately recognize this clearly, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation a quick reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the surgeon raises the limb to the upper parts; then he places his hands below the joint and raises it firmly back into its place with strength, and the surgeon raises the hand of the patient, and extends it as needed; then he pauses it there until it returns quickly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return as we have said, and at the beginning when the dislocation occurred, after a few days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water and given embrocation to soften and relax it as if for treating rheumatism, using alfalfa, fenugreek, and melilot in water.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be placed on their back with their joint hanging down to wait for wool that will fit between the laxity and tightness. Then the physician places the patient's heel on a ball and raises the muscle upwards vigorously, and pulls the patient’s hand so it is not injured below, while another assistant holds the patient's head to prevent it from being hurt below, as it quickly returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: have a man present who is taller than the patient, and let him stand on that side. Place the patient's muscle below the joint and raise the joint upwards so that the patient is suspended in the air, while another assistant pulls the patient’s hand from below their abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the patient is restless, it is necessary to keep him occupied with something else or divert his attention for some other reason, because otherwise the dislocation will recur immediately.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in another way: Place a long post in the ground with its top rounded like the pestle of a mortar, neither too thick nor too thin, and have it positioned near the patient; then place linen cloths over the top of the post. The patient should stand along the length of the post, and extend one arm behind the post while the other side of the body is extended with strength, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction of it is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this treatment: Take a post that is two arms in length and four fingers in width, and its thickness should be proportionate to the size of a reed according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place linen cloths over the round top so that the post does not hurt the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then place the reed near the patient's armpit, and extend the arm or forearm over the post towards the opposite side, and wrap the post with helpers and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then place the arm on a step of a ladder according to its width, and extend the hand towards the opposite side, while the other side of the body is suspended from the other side, because the joint will return immediately.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument is completed according to whichever method is possible for you, then place a pad of wool under the armpit of equal quantity; afterward, apply a plaster prepared with powdered moly and egg white over the entire muscle, as mentioned above, and then bind tightly around the armpit with proper tension. The bandage should be wrapped around the plaster, and the patient's arm should be attached to their neck, and left alone without disturbing it for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	When the patient's food has been restricted for a short time, until the limb is strengthened, for it is easier to heal thus.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And when the food is given more freely after seven or five days and movement is exercised; and thus if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to repeated exposure to moisture that occurs to it or for some other reason, then cautery should be administered three times, as was said before in the chapter about cauteries.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not stable, and the plaster and compression are reapplied several times, yet it remains unstable and the patient cannot raise the arm above certain points, then you should know that the nerves of it, which attach to the head of the bone, have been cut or stretched or softened, and understand that the joint will never be fixed in its proper place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Regarding the dislocation that occurs from the feet and the thigh or the parts behind, the reduction is performed with impulse and extension, until it returns to its proper position.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And let the other compression be applied to it, and care for it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if heaviness and slowness in movement occur during the healing process in the limb, then the patient should use baths several times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the collarbone.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the collarbone is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, but mostly forward or backward. The dislocation does not hide from you when it lies below the view or touch according to its figure, and when you adjust the dislocated bone, this is clearly declared to you because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor touch that muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And you must treat it, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it becomes inflamed, for if it becomes inflamed, it is difficult to reduce it, and even when reduced, it does not heal completely; especially when it is in the backward position, because it is worse than all other types of dislocations, more painful, and many die from this.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand be extended towards the two shoulders, and the arm be expanded, and the doctor's hand should be above the collarbone and below it, and he presses the joint with his fingers together, or with the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is in the forward direction, then it returns as he bends his hand towards himself, until he strikes the collarbone with the palm of his hand.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer vigorous extension and force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two assistants extend the arm, and hold it firmly by both sides so that it does not move due to the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And so wrap the arm completely, because it is wrapped in a long doubled cloth around the hand, or with bandages.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the surgeon touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that this helps with the lubrication of the joint and ease; then forcefully push the joint inward until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And so for the reduction of the shoulder, it should be placed on a support that has stiffness and stability with an eagle's claw bandage, and it should be wrapped tightly with strictures downwards, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and it should be left like this for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it should be loosened; and if the joint is formed in its place, now you untie the bandage of it and leave it like that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not properly set, now you should reapply the plaster and bandages, and leave it like that for several days until it is healed; then loosen it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if you encounter serious pain during the reduction of the joint and the patient is in motion, now administer hydration through bathing and gentle friction, and compression until it is relieved; or place something soothing on the joint, as movement causes discomfort; then bandage it, and leave it on the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then take that off, and put the patient in a bath; when they are dry, now rub the joint with moderate friction, and then reapply something soothing on it, as movement causes discomfort, once, and the second time, and the third time.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	take an instrument for probing, enter with it carefully.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place a poultice over that moist and inflamed fissure at the edge and apply it; do this for several applications, since that area is moist, and reduce it to its proper condition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation of the wrist, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	When the wrist of the hand is dislocated in some cases, the reduction of this dislocation is easy, but the opposite is true for other joints. However, it is important to act with speed in reducing it at the moment when it is dislocated, before swelling occurs or an abscess forms.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of this dislocation is done by placing the joint of the patient's hand on a table and having an assistant extend the patient’s arm. The physician then places his hand or palm over the prominence of the joint and presses it until it returns to its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it is important to consider whether the palm is already displaced toward the front of the hand. If so, the patient should place the two sides of their hand on a table during extension and reduction; if the dislocation is toward the back of the hand, then the position of the patient's hand should be placed directly on the table, so that the physician’s hand can press over that prominence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns to its place immediately, that is good; but if not, then apply a compress over the swelling and leave it like that; do not repeat this, for otherwise, neither will it tolerate nor can you perform the reduction of the dislocation beyond a few days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, if the joint remains rigid according to its curvature; and you find no other cause for injury, except that the hand is softened and cannot grasp any cause; then you know that the nerves are severed or torn, and then there is no generation in it unless it be strengthened by cauterizing proper to the case and thus confer some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Then when the inflammation has subsided, you should pause on the bandage which we have recommended, and let it lie and strengthen for five days; and thereafter it should be loosened and left, and the hand of the patient should be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	However, if the movement of the patient remains restricted and you encounter some gravity in it, then treat that with warm water and friction several times until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the said joint.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	In some cases, the said joints are dislocated completely.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any of those fingers is dislocated toward the thumb or the palm, then hold the finger and apply pressure to its dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the tip of the finger, and suspend it above the part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and extend it until it is properly aligned on its proper day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, bandage it as described, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise with movement, and bind it at night; and do this for several days until it becomes strong.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	If it seems necessary, if the joint is dislocated at the elbow, and bind that to that part and do with this the first operation until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do this when it is dislocated at other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the spinal vertebrae.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs to any of the spinal vertebrae or neck vertebrae and the vertebrae move out of their places, there is no treatment at that time, for death is feared for the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	The sign of this is that the excretion of the patient occurs without their will, and they cannot control it; often some parts of the body on one or both sides are weakened, or an arm or leg becomes paralyzed; or a vertebra has moved from its place, as sometimes it moves and at other times it returns to its original position.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	When that has moved to the rear parts, it is called kyphosis.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	However, the treatment for this is that at that time you must consider whether the kyphosis occurred due to weakness, because in such a case there is no treatment and no complete recovery.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	However, in the case where it occurs due to falling or impact or similar causes, the Ancients described the methods of treatment at length, which I have summarized for brevity; but I have simplified that from which little is lost by my proximity to understanding and explanation, with which I have expounded and formulated using a different approach than that used to demonstrate this and explain that.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And he says that in gapes which occur from the division in front of the feet, there is neither beginning nor healing of those; and similarly with those made on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And those are not cured except for the one that occurs between the two precisely as I mention.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient lies on his back on a flat surface near a wall, and he should be placed low enough so that the feet do not touch the ground.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And near a straight pole should be placed, planted in the ground at the end of the bed around his head, and another pole on the other side by his feet at the other end of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the attendant should hold the pole, and it should not be fixed in a hole; and another attendant should hold the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And wrap a bandage around the head of the patient and under the armpits tightly bind it; and extend the end of the bandage to the pole that is behind his head, and tie it there; and then stretch the other bandage over the hips of the patient near the buttocks; and then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other pole that is behind his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the attendant should extend the bandage to the side of the pole, and do not move the two poles and the bandages from their places where they are placed, but rather keep them as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the physician should place his palms on the patient's spine with strength until he returns, or place him on a table, and then adjust the patient’s feet on the table until he returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If the patient does not return in this manner, take a table whose width or length is about three arms' lengths, and dig near where we said the patient should be a place into which the end of the table can fit.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And place the middle of the table over the spine, and the physician places his weight at the other end, and gently press until the spine is compressed and returns to its proper place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, open again the part that is wrapped around the hand; and place the patient's head at the end of two posts, the length of which should be one arm's length, and behind the patient's head place two more posts in the same manner; and the distance between each post should be a palm, and secure each post firmly to the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And place one round post in which is the ring, and let it be wrapped around the two trunks of the two posts.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a trunk from which the post is formed, the length of which is one palm around where it is wrapped; and on the two other posts there is something similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the ropes that you have tied to the patient's feet at the trunk behind his head, and the ropes that you have tied around his shoulders at the ring behind his legs.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then place someone behind each ring who will turn the ring with their hand, and the physician will compress the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the bowl:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And after the spine is returned and the place leveled, now cover with an astringent plaster mixed with egg white, and then apply wool; and then place over the plaster a stick of wood whose width is three fingers or thereabouts, and whose length should match the extent of the swelling, and on either side of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then wrap it with the bandage we have mentioned, and use a nutritious but light diet until it is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any stiffness in the area at the end of the healing process, now it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and lubricate the joint over a long period, as we have recommended; and also apply a lead plate to that location.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes stiffness occurs in the back of the lower spine due to that dislocation; and it is this bone for which one should not make any preparation with this medicine, for it could easily cause death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the attachment of the muscle are subject only to dislocation, and do not suffer what other joints with small movement and concavity may endure.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip can be dislocated in four ways: either inward, outward, forward, or backward.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is more seriously dislocated towards the interior parts, and slightly towards the anterior or posterior parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The sign of the dislocation of the thigh towards the interior parts is that when you adjust the bed of the healthy limb against the affected one, it appears longer and its joint is more prominent than on the healthy side. The patient cannot bend their leg towards their chin, as this position has become inflamed due to cauterization for an abscessed condition; therefore, the head of the bone has already reached this point.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of the one to whom a dislocation occurs towards the exterior parts is that the symptoms are opposite to those mentioned in this context.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of the one to whom a dislocation occurs towards the anterior parts is that when the bed is elevated according to the complement, they cannot bend it without pain in the joint, and if they attempt to walk, they cannot do so towards the front. The urine of the patient is retained and their swallowing is affected by an abscess, and they are unable to walk on the toes.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of the one to whom a dislocation occurs towards the posterior parts is that they cannot extend the joint, nor can they bend it forward as much as they could before, and their bed appears shorter than usual. The swallowing (or throat) is softened, and the head of the bone is displaced in that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	However, the reduction of these types of dislocations is that you consider whether the dislocation is old and ancient. If it has already become fixed in place, you administer reduction according to its disposition at that time, but it may not be fully cured then; therefore, no complete assurance can be given about the outcome.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In the case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four types of dislocation, place your hands so that you can turn the joint and extend it to its limits both inwardly and outwardly, and move it to the right and left, for it easily returns to its proper position and does not require other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong instrument and extend the ball of the joint from its posterior part, or with its fingers, or with a bandage which is laid over the upper bone; and another person should extend the hand above in such a way that their fingers are placed behind the tubercles. Then tightly bind a lion's skin over the region of the joint, and have another person hold the extremity of the bandage.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And this extension should be from the side or the inner part toward the clavicle, or from the posterior part toward the spine.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And perform all of these extensions at once while the patient is raised onto his shoulders and kept hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is common to all four types.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and if not, then for every type what I say about its proper treatment is necessary.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of its own proper place when it is dislocated, and if the dislocation is toward the inner side, have the patient lie supine on their back; then place bandages over the region of the joint in that location where between the head of the joint and the place below the clavicle; then extend the bandage from above the armpit to the farthest part of the clavicle.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Take another strong minister and grasp his arms, and firmly hold the place of the joint that is dislocated and extend it to its parts outward with great extension, for that returns it to its proper place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is the quickest to heal among those in which this member is reduced compared to the others.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if he avoids you and does not obey the treatment for this species of cure entirely, then it is necessary to bind both sides of the injured part together with a strong, quick, and firm bandage over both heels and both toes.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each be equal to four fingers in quantity, and let the injured hand be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And let the injured person be suspended over the top of the beam, and hold it with his hand; and let the length from the ground to him be equal to two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong young man to pull the head of the joint, and let another young man hold the injured one, while the other young man pulls the joint with great strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the proper reduction, when it is a dislocation to the outward part, let the injured person lie on his back as we have recommended for lying down after eating; and bind the bandage firmly over the injured hand properly and over his feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then place two beams, one under his feet and the other under his head; and then place adjusted beams on each side of the shoulder placed upon which moist cloths are wrapped, so that the injured person is not harmed by the beam being between his arms, to prevent the extension downward parts from being pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	Let each attendant extend his part, and the surgeon with his skill completes the reduction according to art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Thus, if you obey the reversal, it will be greatly beneficial; and otherwise, apply it carefully as we have said regarding inflammation through that method.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But it is necessary that the patient lie on his back calmly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is to the anterior parts, then it is necessary that the limb be extended quickly, and according to this narration on the back; and the surgeon places the palm of his right hand on the affected area, and with both hands pulls it in such a way that the extended part goes from below to the front.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is to the posterior parts, then it is necessary that the patient be extended to the side and raised off the ground; however, it must be placed on a hard surface, as it should also be done if the hip is dislocated outward, according to what we have said about positioning on two boards; and it is on his back with the limbs extended, as we have said, there is no harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it is necessary to administer compression on the table at the location of the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Thus, when the reduction is complete as required — and the sign of hip reduction is not hidden from you, which is that you extend both legs of the patient, and when you see them equal and the patient extends his own leg and spreads it for comfort, then you know that the limb has returned as required — and then you adjust two things and apply a bandage so that the hip is not injured in any part; and instruct the patient to rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then loosen the bandage and the plaster, and compare one cavity with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Now, if you see those equal signs in the garment, now you know that the dislocation has already been fixed, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of softening, now you should return and apply a plaster to it, and strengthen it according to your original structure, and let it be for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then loosen that [area], and have the patient delay in walking on each [limb] for several days, until it is strengthened.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the knee.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The knee is dislocated in three ways, for it can be dislocated outward, inward, and backward toward the back; but it cannot be dislocated forward.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of knee dislocation is that you command the patient to apply their knee to the chest; now you know that the knee is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all forms of dislocation is that you have the patient lie on their side, such that they can extend their leg as much as possible; place your hand against the side of it, and put the foot between your legs; then adhere the knee with your palms, and hold them firmly over the knee with your hands, and another assistant should straighten the leg until the knee returns to its proper place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of recovery for him is that his belly adheres to his sides without laboriousness.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply a plaster to that and make the belly adhere to the sides, and then bind those areas with a bandage for three days or four, and then loosen them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the method of walking for several days until he is healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of him to you is unnecessary, now administer a strong extension with bandages, as was described in the preceding narration about the treatment of the hip.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of dislocation of the thigh.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The thigh sometimes is displaced by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated completely, and the dislocation of it is done either towards the interior parts or towards the exterior parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of it is that you see the thigh swollen towards the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the treatment of its displacement is easy recovery, and it should be extended with ease using the hands until it returns to place.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the treatment when it is completely dislocated, you must perform the procedure correctly, and let him have a strong and capable assistant from behind to help at the proper place.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then place your right hand under the most prominent part of the thigh, and your left hand below the knee at the location of the hip joint.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Place the foot towards you with your right hand, and grasp it with your left hand for two grasps, then extend it with the left hand; and press with your feet the foot with your right hand while working.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this twice as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then press your feet on the foot for the third grasp, and you will be at the knot.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore, if it returns in one grasp or two according to this method, and if the foot becomes numb, it is good; and otherwise, now repeat the operation, for that will return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if it is forbidden for you to reduce the grasp as we have recommended, then place the patient on their back on the ground, and tie a stick firmly to the ground, which should be positioned under the arch of the foot, and you should wrap a cloth around it so that it does not slip.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the attendant should hold the patient's limbs, and another attendant should extend the foot with his hands or with bandages around the neck of the foot; and then each attendant should pull against the extension according to their position, and the stick should be placed between the patient’s limbs to prevent it from being pulled towards the sides during the extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the physician should numb the dislocation with his hands, and another attendant should hold the healthy limb to the sides, as the dislocation will return with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and the health of the reduction is clear to you, now apply a plaster and wrap it firmly with bandages, and bind the foot with bandages to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	Be careful not to damage the nerves which are behind the heel, so that the ligature placed over them does not cause excessive harm.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Bind it like this for two days or three; and if the ligature has softened, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then untie it on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if the patient is forced to move before that time, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and after this it will not receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if it happens that the abscess needs to be cauterized, you should then administer according to the guidance of the liquid in which our narration proceeds, in another place for treatment and application, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the said feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Make sure that the person who is dislocated rests with some extension without work; and this is not difficult, but rather easy.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in some bones of either foot, then you should have the patient lie on their back on a flat surface on the ground or on a table, and they should remain lying down as if they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand, and place your foot on the area you intend to treat, and then step down gently until it returns to its normal position, ensuring that it appears flat and there is no prominence.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	After the pause, place the foot on a table that can support the entire weight of it, which should have two ends, and then bind it with a proper and firm bandage for three days; after this, loosen that and let it rest by walking around for fourteen days, until it is strengthened and its improvement is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	About the kinds of dislocations that are made by plague or fracture or any other circumstances.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When one of those causes occurs and you proceed with the treatment of it and the restoration of the patient, many times death follows.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And because of this, one should not presume to take charge of the treatment unless they are a wise practitioner with long experience, who is merciful and pious, not hasty or presumptuous; and at the beginning, use medicines that only reduce swellings, and leave the patient's fate to divine judgment, but refer them to someone in whom you have hope for salvation from their peril or relief from their illness, where there appears any hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then strive to perform the reduction for them as soon as possible at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes a swollen abscess.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the limb returns as we want it to, immediately administer a regimen that reduces swelling and treats the injury with what is appropriate from among the dried remedies.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is with a fracture and occurs in the separated bones, then you should treat them accordingly, and do as we have said regarding simple injuries, dealing with each location as has been described.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your virtue the one of instrument in the ways of fear as it is preceded by my preaching; for this is better for you to please your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and most salutary for your true body you will see these in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Albucasis perfectly, for which God be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
