Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, my children, now I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine. By its completion at the end and by its explanations and clarifications within it, in my view, I believe I have rendered comprehensible to you the treatise on that part of practice that I love, namely surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For surgery has been greatly neglected in our region and in our time, although the science of it still exists and its foundations remain. There are only small descriptions of it in the books of the Ancients, which have led many astray into error and hesitation because they misinterpret its intentions and weaken its power and art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I should enliven this treatise by organizing it according to the method of explanation and clarification and abbreviation; and so that the forms of cauterizing tools and other instruments used in the practice may become clear through additional explanation and preparation, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the reason why a good practitioner is not readily found in our time is that the art of medicine is extensive and requires one to be well-versed in anatomy, which involves knowing the functions of the members and their forms, as well as their connections and separations; and to have knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, along with their numbers and structures; and of the pulsating and non-pulsating veins and their locations.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this reason Hippocrates said that in name there is much, but in deed little, and especially in the practice of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	This we have already said in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not well versed in what we have said about anatomy will surely fall into error by which men are killed, as I have seen too many of them, for some are formed in this science and get themselves out of that with lack of knowledge and experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a mad physician who had opened an abscess on the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed out, by which the woman died.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another physician who claimed that he would remove a stone from a man who was suffering from kidney stones, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone along with part of the bladder, by which that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I had already examined and called upon to remove that stone, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I recognized that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another physician who was paid by a duke of our land to perform surgery, and he attended to a black castrated man who had a fracture in his thigh; and due to the doctor's ignorance, he exposed the fracture above the wound with splints and bandages in a strong structure, but did not leave room for swelling.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And he loosened it according to his desires, and soon he rebandaged it, and after some days commanded that we loosen the bandage; and thus it remained until the thigh and foot became abscessed, and he came to ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and prepared to loosen the bandage, and upon doing so, he found relief from his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, once corruption was confirmed in the limb, because it could not be restrained, and it did not cease to spread the corruption throughout the limb until the patient was in danger.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another surgeon who incised a cancerous abscess, and it ulcerated near the armpit, until the greatness of the evil became apparent to his lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause of which is that the malignant cancer is free of melancholic humor; therefore, it does not need to affect all the iron [bones], but rather be in the limb where it can be hosted by everything.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, children, it is necessary for you that the operation be planned in two aspects: one is an operation associated with health, and the other is a procedure in which there is risk even under the best conditions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already stated this in every part of this book where an operation involves both error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to heed this and leave that, so that the readers do not find a way to criticize and defame you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And so take up your weapons with vigilance and the protection of God, and treat your patients with skill and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best method by the grace of God to lead to health and praiseworthy success, and leave behind terrible diseases that are difficult to heal, and avoid those things that make you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for it remains more for your glory, and much in this world and later in the praise of your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Wound treatment in some monastic surgeries:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat illness badly, for then bad doctors are not named.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And thus I have divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered about the head, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cauteries, and of what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, about cutting and piercing, and about cupping, and bandaging, and extracting arrows and similar things, all chaptered and ordered regarding the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, about restoration and dislocation, and the treatment of twists and similar conditions; a chapter ordered concerning the head, and the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	About cautery with fire and with sharp medicine and recall of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that begins the treatise of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I shall describe the quality of the actions of that cautery and its ingredients, and in what condition cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the speech about the quality of the actions of cautery and its ingredients is long and extensive, subtle by science, and secretly hidden; and many wise people have spoken about it extensively, and they are often discordant about it, but for me a little of their speeches suffices, fearing lengthiness.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	Therefore, I say that cauteries are applied universally to all parts, whether they have substance or not, with the exception of two parts, which are tail-like parts without substance.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the dry and solid tail-like part, there is disagreement; for some say that cauterization is helpful for it, while others say the opposite, that cauterization is not appropriate in a disease characterized by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is inappropriate to treat a dry and solid ailment with something hot and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And those who say the opposite, that cauterization is helpful for all dry and solid diseases that occur in human bodies, are correct, because when you compare the human body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find that the human body is more fragile.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say according to the words of that person, that experience has already shown this to me on several occasions.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But I do not wish to go into that for one who has already been tested and exercised in the chapter of cauterization through previous exercise, and has known the diversity of human constitution and the disposition of diseases in their seasons, and the causes of those diseases and their accidents, and the duration of time for them.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in the other parts, there is no need for fear on your part, especially in fragile and humid diseases, because all doctors are now in agreement about those, and they do not disagree about the benefit of cauterization in them.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And you know, children, that the secret of healing by fire and its goodness is that when it comes to cauterization with burning medicine, fire is simple, and its action affects only the member being cauterized, without affecting other members nearby except for minor harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	Here is the English translation:
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Keep the fire, by its height and by the goodness of its substance, does not do anything but superfluify. And it is known to us through experiment and through length of service in studying this art about the truth of causes; and for that I excuse myself from the length of speech. And if it were not read in my book at this point I would hide from you secrets with the fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies and the expulsion thereof by which illnesses are expelled, with philosophical demonstrative speech, which would sharpen your wits.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And understand, children, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to perform cautery and they pause at the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the harm caused by accidental circumstances of time is submerged in the benefit brought about by what is drawn from the cautery, and even more so if the cautery is for pains or necessary pain, such as strength and boils, which do not tolerate delay due to fear of malice that may arise, for it is better than a small harm entering through the wrong time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And this does not cross your minds, or, children, what is valued only by the common people and foolish doctors is that for the illness which is cured by cautery it is not opportune at all times, and they pause in its consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the reason is not thus because they think it is so, for cautery is nothing but a substitute for medicine that alters the complexion and dries up the humors which are the cause of pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But still, cautery surpasses medicine in terms of the speed of its effectiveness and the virtue of its operation and the greatness of its power.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that his illness may return at some time according to the condition of the patient and the location of his illness, and its nature, and what is prepared in his body by the accumulation of superfluities within him, and what has been acquired through food and similar causes; but if the illness in which cauterization was administered is a subtle illness of few superfluities and humidities, such as cauterization of a tooth for pain and similar things, it is possible that that pain will not return in him, but this is done rarely.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And the common saying is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is said by practitioners, not because those who understand it think there is no cure in medicine or any other cause before cauterization, but because they believe that when all other remedies have been tried without success, cauterization may be necessary.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and the understanding that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer methods of cure for certain illnesses, and those medicines do not help, and then at the end of the treatment cauterization is administered, and it proves effective for that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And here I say that cauterization is not the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which the common people and the foolish physicians hold.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and its excellence in substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place for cauterization does not matter, which is absolutely not true, because I have seen it proven and have observed that this does not work in some bodies but works well with others; cauterization with gold is good and better than with iron as they say. However, when you perform cauterization with fire using gold, it is not clearly defined for you, since the hardness of the gold determines its quantity needed, and it prepares to receive friction; if you adjust over it with fire, the gold melts due to the heat, and if you place some sheets in the fire, the craftsman can shape them according to that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And thus is made the cautery of iron, which you should apply lightly and gradually according to the right procedure.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have arranged this chapter on cauteries according to the chapters, and I have placed those for the head among the parts, so that I alleviate the seeker asking for what they desire.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cautery for headache due to cold and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery is applied to the humidity and coldness that cause headaches and two other conditions resulting from these causes: one is due to soda and a multitude of traumatic fluxes called herpes, affecting the head and parts around the ears with fluid discharge, excessive sleepiness, toothache, and throat pain, and generally all diseases caused by coldness such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: first, order the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine for the head cleansing, for three or four nights, according to what you deem necessary based on the strength of the patient, their age, and their usual habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then place him seated on a chair and have him rest his hands on his knees.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the palm of your hand above the eyebrows on the shaved part of the nose between the eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But when the heat of your finger reaches that spot, mark it with ink, and then apply the olive oil cautery, which has this form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	Then place upon the affected area a poultice made from lint, in such a way that it descends, with which the skin may be gradually compressed, and you should turn it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Then lift your hand gently and look at the place, and if you see any amount of the head of the bone exposed, as much as the quantity of a grain of corn, then raise your hand, and if not return your hand to that tool, or another like it, if it is cold, until you can see the bone that I have told you about.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	Then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Then place on the wound a poultice soaked in butter and leave it on until the burn scar is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the area with a quadruple ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And if it is said that when the swelling has subsided, the sooner the bandage is removed, the better and more beneficial it is.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them say that the wound should be cauterized near the bone, and that the cautery should remain until it adheres to some part of the bone.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Then remove what has adhered to the bone, and then treat it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that with the cautery it should reach to the deepest part, until it presses firmly on the bone, and this is the way to heal slightly:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that place emanates the vapor of the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let the wound be treated for a long time until it is healed and has become firm.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I have not seen these two types of cautery used on everyone, but only on some people out of fear; and one should leave that, in my opinion, if it is better for the health. For the head is easily injured by solutions to continuity as we have testified with other members, and especially when the sick person has a delicate nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is safer and better, in my opinion; and with that one can use it for the benefit of health.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Second.
Del cauteri del cap.	On Cautery of the Head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head and this condition is prolonged in the patient, and one uses plasters, decoctions, capifers (herbal remedies), poultices, cataplasms, eggs, cats, chickens, and similar treatments, especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that we have described but to no avail for any of these causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution in its nature; and if it is not delicate and feels no great pain, one can then proceed to use another form of cautery after some time.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that area above the crown of their head with cautery until the pain is relieved.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut open the painful area and expose the bone in the quantity we have described, then cauterize that area with a cautery at the back of the head in the place called "vas" — which is the location where the vein is situated.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And do not apply it in this way, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will suffer great pain different from the pain of all other cauteries of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I will describe this cautery in its place, for it is more delicate to cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput than with that which is used to cauterize the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Chapter Three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the cautery for recent swelling.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When severe pain occurs in the part of the head, or if there is lingering pain within the skull, it should be evacuated with medicines that cleanse the head, and another treatment should be administered, which I have described for various illnesses; and if this does not benefit, then cauterization is done in two ways: either cauterization with a sharp burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But if you use a burning medicine for cautery, take a piece of amber and burn it, removing the ends from both sides.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then you should incise the area of the pain on the temple with a lancet slightly below where it is felt, so that it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then apply pressure to it with bandages for about three hours; after that, loosen them and remove the amber, and leave the wound covered for two or three days; afterwards, place a piece of wood soaked in butter on it until the area becomes warm.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you want, use those medicines that I have written in the second treatise on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And this is how you perform cautery with iron using this kind of cautery tool: fire for the cautery, and here is its form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called a nail clamp, because its head is shaped like the form of a nail, in which there is some curvature, and at the middle part of it is a small protrusion.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place it on the location of the pain, and hold your hand — so that the artery below is not adhered to — and rotate the iron slightly by little movements quickly.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount that adheres due to the curvature is such that half of it sticks, raise your hand so that the artery below is not adhered to, so that there is no flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak cotton in salt water and place it on the location, and leave it for three days; and then put mulberry leaf poultice on it, and afterwards treat with an ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, perform cautery at the end of the radial bone according to the cautery method, and be careful not to cut the artery in this non-traditional procedure.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the cautery of an ancient wound.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat an ulcer as we have said in the previous treatment and in the divisions of diseases, and if it does not improve, and sometimes due to the disease what has been mentioned about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire is insufficient, then you should ignite the radial cautery until it becomes white-hot, and place it along the line where the pain is, the length of which is half a finger's width or so; and then raise your hand once and firmly press it to cut the artery and reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the jawbone, which is necessary for chewing, and that the lizard [muscle] not adhere and the nerves which move it, and that it not become spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is cut, for in its cutting there is fear, and especially for one who does not know what he is doing and is not studious and experienced; and leave the operation to him at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And here I will come to the recollection of the regimen of blood flow from an artery according to the usual manner, in its place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see from this disease that these cauteries are not sufficient and the patient's condition is tolerable, cauterize him at the appropriate location of the head as we have recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you do, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on the rupture of an artery with a cautery having two prongs, and this is better cautery and more effective.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the cautery for ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain in the ear occurs due to friction and is treated with laxative causes and with the other treatment which I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain does not subside, now use the cautery, and this one has the name puncta, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And bring the puncta close to the fire, and move it around the entire ear as a wheel turns, or in the vicinity of each part if the pain is in that part.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Hold the cautery on the rim of the ear gradually and mark the place with it.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery is applied to those points all around the ear, and wherever it affects, take care of the places until they heal.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cautery of the turtle.  
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The one for which treatment and cautery are not used is only of the types that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery for the type that arises from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that type of illness with jerras and capipurgi and guaraguars, and your treatment does not provide comfort, then it is necessary to cauterize the disease with three cauteries: the first at the root of the ear, and the second a little below in the temple area, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cautery at the opposite part of the diseased area, because softening occurs only in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cautery is that you cauterize there with the cautery on the right side of the extremity of the most prominent ear, and then a little above the horn of the head, and in another temple area, the length of which should be according to the length of your thumb, and then pause your hand with the cautery until half the quantity of the condition is consumed.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is specific for the ulnar area, the form of which is described above.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, more subtly, it is as you see a little; and it is necessary to use a knife instead of excessive roughness a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And immediately treat the area with the liquid that was previously prepared until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cautery for ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said and do not apply your medication, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize that area with four cauteries: on top of all the temples of their head; and one cauterization on the middle part of the head, as we have said; and one cauterization in the nape.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cautery is done as mentioned above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is already cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is better this way; and proceed with its treatment as appropriate.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On the cautery for oblivion performed with flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Give the patient large doses and pills at the beginning to purify the mind.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then shave the patient's head completely and place on their nape a plaster as described in the chapter on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And apply that for several applications, for this is the method of the cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to the order I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And thus if healing occurs well through those methods; but if not, then perform three cauteries on the rear part of their head, which extend from the uppermost part of the head down to the part nearest the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place about the width of a finger between each cauterization, and then proceed to treat the cautery as described.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you want to apply it for the lesser harm, now make use of cautery in its proper place; and if you wish to apply it more strongly, now cauterize over both sides.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Proceed with the treatment until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form given above.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cautery for parasites and the softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Proceed as you would in cleansing the head with scissors and water as we have said; then shave the head of the patient, and afterward cauterize it with cautery in its proper place on the head, and with cautery over all parts of the head, and with cautery on the rear part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the illness of softening the body to treat it strongly and the patient can tolerate such treatment and the illness is severe, now cauterize it with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and finally with one cautery inside until it is consumed by the skin, and raise the heat moderately.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then proceed with the treatment until it is healed, and let this cautery be olive-shaped.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cautery for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	An epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, you should cleanse the brain of the patient at the beginning with scissors and with the other treatment we have mentioned in the division when the patient is strong and can tolerate the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, at that time administer gargles and powders to clean the mouth, before which for two days purify the food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize one with a cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous method, and another cautery at the back of the head, and on each side of the head cauterize as well.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize with the cauteries I have mentioned, having paralysis and relaxation of the body over the cervical vertebrae and the thoracic vertebrae.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let it be an olive-cautery as was previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then use a gentle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On Cauterization for Melancholia.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholia are due to corrupted humidity and phlegm, then cauterize with the cauteries we have mentioned while inducing paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholia is an excess leaning towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give them to drink what purifies their brain according to what was mentioned earlier in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the head of the patient, and subsequently place a well-made tortora over the circle, and then apply it to the middle part of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	Let the wound be sixty days old, and let it be treated from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a liniment; and it is better to use the grease of sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that over the fire with a moderately warm heat, which the patient can tolerate when applied.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place that in the middle of the patient's head in a circle, and let it be rubbed in.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this once a week for the wound, and with another regimen to promote healing internally; or if you prefer, cauterize that with small points according to what is necessary, but hold your hand in such an order: this is a special type of cautery that moistens the brain with equilibrium.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then apply that powder mixed in grease or chicken fat.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cautery of water descending in the belly.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared to you the beginning of water in the belly by the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something that purifies their head, and protect them from all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And have the patient sweat in a warm bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command the patient to shave their head, and cauterize that in the middle of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of water descending into two bellies, or on one side if it is the beginning of water in one belly.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut and apply cautery to all the veins and arteries that you leave for the ligature; and place the cauteries at a distance in the region of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And guard against bleeding when it is cauterized; and if you see any bleeding, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come to the knowledge which is in the extraction of arteries and their ligation and caution against bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And in some cases it is cauterized on the neck below two bones with two cauteries properly applied.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old wounds.  
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the eyes are old and flow continually through veins and arteries which are clearly visible on the head, it is verified that this is due to an excess of cold phlegm. At this time, cauterize in that place with a cautery which we have recounted in the chapter about beginning to draw water into the eyes, and apply one cautery in the middle part of the head, and two cauteries at the back of the neck below the temples, and two cauteries at the back of the neck below the bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need to add something, then at this time cauterize there across the sole of the eye above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On Cauterization for Nasal Odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that condition as we have said in the division and it does not improve with your medication, then prepare and give the patient cochineal to drink for three nights; afterward, shave his head, and cauterize there a medium-sized cautery with an olive-shaped cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And afterward, cauterize there with a carnation-shaped cautery and apply two cauteries above the eyebrows behind the hair, a little bit.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful of the artery so that you do not burn it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the shape of the carnation-shaped cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On Cauterization for Softening the Eyelids.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with one cautery in this lunar-shaped cautery; and this is the shape of it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, when cauterizing above the two eyebrows, use two cauteries throughout, and let them extend towards the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cauterization be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand upon the cauteries, but according to the amount by which the third part of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On cauterizing the eyelid when the hairs turn inward and pinch the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eyelid turn inward and pinch the eye, cauterization should be done in two ways: either by performing it or using a burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you cauterize with fire, instruct the patient beforehand to trim their hairs as do those who are clean-shaven, such that they are lengthened and even; and if they pinch where they grow, then bandage the eyes so that nothing enters until the hairs have grown back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	When they have grown back and are even, then place the patient's head in your lap, and gently press on the eyelids where you intend to cauterize, marking it out like a leaf of lettuce, with the beginning of the mark near the hairs.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then place a cotton pad soaked in egg white or mucilage of starch on the eyelid.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then ignite the cautery which has this shape.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize on the figure which you have marked, little by little, in several stages, until the surface of the bone which is like a myrtle leaf is entirely consumed properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of health in this work is that you see the eyelid already contracted and the hairs on it raised due to the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and lay it aside for three days, and afterwards pause on the wound's edge until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of that wound until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the hairs around it grow back and the eyelid becomes softened, then perform the cautery on that area again just as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hairs remain in the eyelid below, then cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural position and healed so that the hairs do not touch the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with a burning medicine is such that you instruct the patient to stretch out the hairs until they are lengthened and healed, and then make from paper or cloth the shape of a myrtle leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take known soap and one uncia or more of a living cause, and mix those causes well, and apply this quickly so that it is not rubbed; and spread this on the paper which is made like the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place that over both eyes; and place below the eye wound wrapped in white cloth, and the head of the patient should be at your side.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Here is the translation:
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And so when he perseveres in what the swelling of the bite is, then leave off the medicine and bathe it with that which you said; and when the biting ceases, then again apply the medicine and wash the wound with water; and then consider whether the eyelid is raised as much as it was washed, loosen the ligature by fire or incision, for then it is well; and if not return to that of the medicine on the place where you did not use the medicine and let it not darken until your operation be equalled and the wound constricted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then pause upon the cut at the border until the root of the injury is eradicated, and then treat that with definite definition or otherwise until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to guard with vigilant diligence that no rust of the medicine falls into the wound, and if after some days the eyelid becomes softened due to some cause of hair growth in the wound, then repeat your medicine on that place where the eyelid is softened, and properly as you did at the beginning, and then wait until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of the leaf of myrtle.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the wounds of men vary in size and smallness, and therefore according to this is made your contraction.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And the way to remedy will not be hidden from one who studies in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cautery of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the wound. 
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat fistula with the water we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases and do not confine your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to place his head or chin on something steady, and hold his head still by someone else's hand in such a way that it is neither too tight nor agitated.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And place cotton or lint on the wound or over the hair of it.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then heat the cautery, which has this form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be hollow, as in the shape of a reed or eagle's feather, with one end through which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it should penetrate into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to be as thin as a thread.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But the one that is concave is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the putrefaction from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place the cautery over it, which should be well heated, and hold it from that point with your hand a little away from the wound, so that you do not miss your aim or disturb the patient, and then place the cautery on the edge of the wound and burn it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of your cauterization it penetrates to the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cauterization once or twice if necessary; and leave it like that for three days, and then place cotton around it and cover it with a drying ointment until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If after eleven days it has not healed, then apply acute corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed, according to what is convenient in its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula which the ancients first described: enter into the location of the fistula and apply to it in that fissure finely powdered material, whose form corresponds to its shape. And pour onto it one ounce of melted lead; with your hand well restrained, so that no injury occurs because the melted lead does not reach the flesh of that area; and it is necessary to place over the wound cloth dipped in egg white or in water, for the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed by what we have said about cauterization and treatment, it is good; but if not, it is necessary to administer traction through the nose and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose as it will come into its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cauterization of clefts in the teeth.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Fissures often occur in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment is not effective, then use small knife cauterization according to this form that will be described:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And the sharpness of it should be according to the fineness of the blade.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then apply that hot instrument carefully to those fissures until the cauterization reaches the depth of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, take care of that which is inside with wax so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On cauterizing a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth there is an abscess and it becomes inflamed, and then it breaks open, and then it becomes old, and flows continuously and a fistula is formed; when you treat that and it does not improve, now is the time to cauterize according to the quantity received in the fistula, and then place the heated cautery into the tract of the fistula, and with your hand ensure that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it; at the end do this once or twice. Then treat what we have said about internal treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the fistula is severed and it heals, that is good; but if not, now it is necessary to discover the location and excise the corrupted bone as will be described in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On cauterizing the teeth and softening the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and you treat them with medicines but they do not improve, now place the tip of the cautery in your own mouth, and then ignite the cautery whose form will be described later; then place the tube over the tooth and insert the heated cautery quickly into it, holding it firmly so that the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then take your hand, and then repeat the cauteries as many times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out, because the decayed tooth is hardened and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cautery for toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to coldness, or there is pain or inflammation, and if you do not wish to treat it with medicine, then cautery in that case is appropriate in two ways: either with a cow's horn or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with a horn is when you take a cow's horn and heat it over fire, then cut cloth and wrap it around the end of the horn. Then immerse the heated horn in water quickly before placing it on the painful tooth while it is still warm.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times until the effect of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, submerge wool or cloth in the aforementioned horn, and place it on the painful tooth, then place heated iron on top of it until the heat reaches the source of the pain in the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, cautery with fire is that you attend to the thickness of the tube of iron or copper, so that in its middle there is some thickness and the intensity of the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	From the fire make the cautery of which I will describe the form, and place it upon the tooth and hold it there with your hand until the cautery is rubbed in; and do this several times so that the pain may be alleviated either on that day or on the following day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary that by pressure of that cautery the patient fill his mouth with hot water and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize as much as you wish according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On Cauterization of Hernias.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are full of phlegm and humors that resist digestion by medicines and you wish to digest them gently, then make the cautery in the form described below, having two open ends so that the smoke can escape. Hold the ignited cautery with one end, and place it on the swelling once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the base of the swelling.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the swelling is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the swelling, and afterwards leave it for three days, and then place it over the spot in hot water until what the fire has burned is alleviated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then care for it with dressings and bandages until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the cannula or cautery for this purpose is as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On cautery for hoarseness of voice and on the compression of the veins.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humidity of the veins affects the channel of the lung, and especially when this is accompanied by coldness in complexion, one should first evacuate the patient at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that part above the root of the throat.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to reach the cauterization to the throat, nor burn more than a little of the skin.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that area with another cautery at the junction of the collarbone and the last cervical vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And let the cautery be made in the shape of a nail following the previous method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area with what has been prescribed until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On cautery for lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are due to cold humidity without fever or consumption and the illness is chronic, then cauterize that area with two cauteries above the clavicles in the upper armpit areas; and with another cautery at the middle location of the chest between the two nipples; and let the cauteries be made in the shape of a nail according to the previous method.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, your cautery can be done punctually with a cautery called puncta, the form of which is described in the section on piercing ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Let them puncture into veins those things which are intended for that purpose; and afterwards treat that part with the methods mentioned before so that it may be healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And let there be three cauteries for that cautery, because with one application you can perform three cauteries in this manner:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On cautery for the treatment of the tremor that affects the head.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is dislocated due to humid and slippery causes and it does not return to its normal position after the dislocation, you should first reduce the dislocation and then lay the patient on their back or side; subsequently, raise the neck which is in the part inside the skull upwards with your left hand if the joint is dislocated inwardly.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the cautery having two tips; and this is the form of it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the neck so that it penetrates into the opposite side; and the figure of the cautery will now have four tips after this procedure.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And adjust that finely according to the amount needed; and this is the form of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And at times it is adjusted according to this method, and thus the cauteries will be eight.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place the cautery over it covered with salt, and subsequently keep the patient calm, and do not move the limb for some time until it is healed.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is at the upper parts, do it thus: immediately cauterize over the muscle with a cautery nail or with pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the moisture is consumed and the ailment is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On Cauterization of the Stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is bleeding in the stomach, fry and mix dry substances within it that match its composition and multiply them as much as possible. And if you continue with the methods of treatment without confirmation, then it must be that the ailment is on its second day subsiding, and extend its uses and its things, and immediately cauterize that area with three cauteries: one cauterization below the feet by the length of a finger, and two pointed cauteries below each side of the middle cauterization, so that the figure of the cauterizations forms a triangle; and stretch them apart so they do not touch, which will prevent putrefaction.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cauterization is the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the rib.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the figure of the cauterization be in this form without addition. And if you want, cauterize with a large cautery at the middle part of the stomach in this form; and this shall be a cautery in the shape of a circle in this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be cauterized with points for one who is frightened by this cautery: and that you mark on the stomach with points in the quantity you wish with a needle, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and then treat it with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On cauterization of an inflamed bladder.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain arises in the bladder due to coldness or humidity or excessive flatulence that causes the normal urine to be expelled through excessive urination, and when this ailment is treated with the water method as we have described and does not provide relief, then the patient should lie on their back with their head raised. In this position, three cauteries are applied below the bladder near the hypochondria, in the manner and quantity specified.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each caustic should be according to the thickness of a finger, and the size of the cauteries should be according to the length of the right arm.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not compress the area around the cauteries.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of water retained is half the capacity of a jug and not more; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they cannot stand, then they should sit, having prepared their belongings, and raise their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to perform these cauteries with a knife cauterization when you possess subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to press too hard during the cauterization, and let it retain the capacity of a whole jug so that the entire body retains moisture and reaches the bladder, for here the urethra is delicate; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the Incision of an Abscess of the Testicle with Caustics.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When you find an inflammation or abscess in the testicle and want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the testicle or in the tunica, then if it is in the flesh of the testicle, the patient will complain of heaviness and pain without sharpness.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunica of the testicle, then the pain will be sharp and often it exhausts the skills of the physicians to treat it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, the patient should be positioned on his back; then feel the location of the abscess carefully; and subsequently apply the cautery which resembles a reed, the form of which was described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that cautery until the entire area is consumed, until it reaches the cicatrix, until it becomes dry and heals.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that abscess like the treatment of other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not appropriate to use this form of cautery except by one whose study in the art of medicine is extensive and who has known many diseases; but even then, this experiment should be attempted only a few times on such an operation, but rather leave that to us, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the Cauterization of Hemorrhoids.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancients said that cauteries made from the roots of aristology should be applied to hemorrhoids according to this method: take one root of aristology, which is dry and long, as long as your finger, and has a thickness like that of your finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Here is the translation into English:
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not be afraid to use your cautery, but apply it openly in front of the wound.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And just as some ancient authors say that some men used to cauterize with a hot iron like a ray of fire and heated it, and placed it in the place between the shoulders until it reached the abscess so that the pus could be evacuated from it, as we have said regarding the testicular abscess.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this perforation with the cautery there is no need for fear, for one dies immediately or an accident occurs at the place where the fistula is located and where there is no cure.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the Cauterization of Boils.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the disease of boils as we have discussed in the division and do not confer your treatment, at that time the cautery is done in three ways, all of which are effective. One way is to make three or four cauterizations along the length of the boil according to its figure, similar to the shape of the testicular cauteries, the description of which has been given previously.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And there should be a space of the width of one finger or a bit more between each cauterization, and the method of the cautery should be the same method we have described for the testicular cauteries as well.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not be afraid to use your cautery; and the patient should lie on their back for this treatment.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another method of cauterizing, which is to heat the cautery vertically in two places, as we have described in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the side where the boil is located, so that the patient's left side faces upwards.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And so raise it up as you raise the chain according to the length of the body, so that cauteries may be made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two ends, one ignited, into that opening where each of them penetrates the chain from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three ends.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then take care of the cautery so that it does not shake for too many days, for it is more convenient than other causes previously mentioned in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On Cauterization of Hydrops.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cautery is not used in hydrops except in some specific cases.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the hydrops using the methods of treatment we have mentioned in the division and do not conform to your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize with four cauteries around the navel, and one cauterization over the stomach, and another cauterization over the liver, and another cauterization over the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cauterization on the right foot, and another cauterization over the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the thickness of the chain.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the cautery open so that it shakes for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	If you do not remove the harmful matter from the treatment before applying heat with water that is suitable for joining the two edges, it will be necessary to hurry with assistance for healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be in the form of a nail as described above, and the one with which the back is cauterized should be in the shape of an olive according to its preceding description.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On Cauterization of the Feet and Other Matters.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are affected by abscesses and are filled with serous fluid, it is suitable to cauterize them above the second toe using water that is between lukewarm and warm, and raise your hand with the cautery without twisting it; then lift your hand and do not return it completely, as the serous fluid will drain.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery should be in this form: And then apply two cauteries on each of the two areas, and at each area use a cautery with the tip of the cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be in accordance with the length of the area: one below the joint and the other at the middle part of the area; and apply two cauteries on each area.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound uncovered during treatment for some time so that some fluid can drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then treat with the causes that we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On cauterization of abdominal wounds.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When abdominal wounds are due to friction and internal humidity that weakens the vital forces, which are the digestive and retentive faculties located in the stomach and intestines, it is treated with hot applications according to the methods of treatment and should not be neglected. Sometimes when the patient endures well, apply a strong cautery over their stomach as previously described for stomach cauterization, using a circular cautery and four subtle cauteries around the navel, or a subtle nail-shaped cautery; sometimes two such cauteries are applied on both sides of the navel.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if there are excessive humidities and the patient can tolerate it, then apply the cautery over the navel and around the intestines, gently placing two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal regions, for this is a perfect method of treatment from which you will not deviate.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On cauterization of chronic hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When there is a natural tendency towards chronic hemorrhoids or one caused by thick humors or corrupted humidities, they are treated as we have described in the division and should not be neglected. Then apply three cauteries below the spine on both sides near the small triangular area, and place another cautery above the navel, positioned between these two.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that the stomach is irritated and the food is not being digested, and the face appears swollen or inflamed, then apply a strong cautery over the stomach as previously described; place one cautery on the spleen and another on the liver with a nail-shaped cautery. Allow this treatment to continue for some time until the patient is healed inside.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cautery of the artery near the removal of the tooth.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you extract a tooth, apply the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Near the extracted tooth, introduce the heated cautery, but do not insert it so far that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, for if the tooth becomes too sore, then cauterize each of them as we have described, and subsequently treat them with what you consider appropriate from among the remedies until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery over the gum, it is better to do so gently.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cautery of fistulas that are formed in the nature near the parts down there.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not respond to the treatment we have recommended in its place, and the patient is afraid of that, heal it with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	When someone has a fistula in the nature behind, and it is old, with corrupt pus and moisture, then what should be done first is to probe it carefully, and subsequently you will know the depth of it by means of the previously mentioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then heat the cautery that resembles a rod.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then place the heated cautery into this fistula according to how deep the probe went.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then apply the cautery to burn those corrupted tissues once or twice or three times, according to the extent of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And guard against burning nerves and veins; or if the fistula leads to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then guard against all those places; and do this only when the fistula is in a fleshy location and you think it will not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the place so that it may heal.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed and the substances are absorbed, and it remains this way for a long time, then you will know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the substances do not remain inside but come out, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the area of the bone that is corrupted, or this happens due to those causes which will be recalled in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On Cauterization of Warts.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When warts cause pain due to rubbing or excessive swelling, and because of this the patient suffers discomfort, then it is appropriate to cauterize them with a cautery on each wart using a nail of which the description will be recalled.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And apply the cauterization to each one after a small interval, so that there will be three cauterizations lined up, and thus they will be more effective in providing relief.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On Cauterization of the Bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When it happens that in the bladder there is debility and softening due to rubbing and moisture such that the patient does not retain urine, at this time cauterize in the area near the pus just above the bladder, where the hair of the pubis begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of the pus; and cauterize with one cautery in the lower part near the two areas, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let it be a nail-shaped cautery according to the process.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On Cauterization of the Wound.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is rubbing and moisture in the wound, and because of this it is prohibited to apply pressure, and her menstruation becomes corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and pain occurs due to their occurrence, then it should be that the area be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said regarding the cauterization of the bladder; and one cautery above the area near both sides, or two cauteries, and let the cautery be nail-shaped.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On Cauterization of the Dislocation of the Joint.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture and swelling are effused to the area of the joint, and the causes lead to the displacement from its location, and the sign of it is that the limb is prolonged over the other when they are compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The place for reduction is found where the bone lies.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then you should cauterize the malady above the part of the bone in a circular manner, since you will have marked it with thread around the part just as it is turned, and so that the part falls on the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And this is the cautery which precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, now cauterize that part with three cauterizations using a large olive-shaped cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the quantity of the spitting from the entire body; and then treat that intestine so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLI.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the part of the bone, and its cause is friction and humidity, the malady is treated as we have said and does not conform, and this is old-fashioned, now you should relieve the malady of thick humors with fetid pills or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of the cautery in this case is according to two methods: either use a cautery with combustible medicines, or use fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It is done according to two known methods, one of which is that you should cauterize that area above the part of the bone with three triangular cauterizations following this form; and do it with proper depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the spaces which are between each cautery be the quantity of the thickness of a finger, and if the cauteries are olive or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	And in some cases let the cauteries be on the back part of the head, for there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, cauterize also the circle from which precedes the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the shoulder, and that it be a containing circle and burn the protrusion of the entire collarbone.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cautery in cases where pain is adherent to the shoulder and does not extend into the arm.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it extends into the arm, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the arm at the place to which you would direct the malady that is the pain; and one cauterization over the joint four fingers slightly towards the wilderness side.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is cutellar, let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the protrusion of the collarbone.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if you direct the malady that the pain extends into the area near the tips of the toes, then cauterize there where you would direct with one cautery at three points or four or more as you may need.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if you direct the malady that the pain is below the elbow on the arm, then cauterize there with one cutellar cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cauterizations that you do not end the cautery until you burn a nerve or large artery, and by this it is upon the malady without harm or contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen one and another of those who cauterize over the nail and finish in the cauterization, and the bed of fire inflated until the tumor reached the flesh, and fire perforated and corrupted all the flesh.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And as a result of a severe purging of the bowels, and as a result of that death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise ones say in the cauterization of any cauterizing iron, which is made in this way: make it resemble a circle of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and let its hole be according to the thickness of a date stone or less by a little.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle there should be another one a third of its size; and the space between them should be the quantity of a pea; and those circles should be divided into two parts; and the length of those bars should be the size of a pea or two peas, and attach these edges of iron decently to the circles; and this is the form of it.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then ignite it in the fire until it turns red and sparks, and then place it on the affected part of the body, with the malady positioned on the back.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And thus cauterize that area three times in one session.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then let it rest for three days; then apply a plaster to that area and let the wound be covered for more than ten days; and then treat that area with remedies until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	O son, we have rarely used this type of cautery due to the fear of its observation, and because few people who observe it have found it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	Of the many cauteries applied to him who endures them, he finds great benefit from that one in particular.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	The most effective cauteries along with medicines are those you make in the shape of two circles using a perforated armula, through which fits the handle of an iron door; let the length of the walls be as thick as two nuts or somewhat larger.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the spaces between each are as wide as the thickness of a finger; and let them be raised both below and above, so that they fit together in this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And place it over the part of the arm where the patient is seated, and press your hand on that part of the arm; then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and let the quantity of this be small at first and gradually increase, and let it remain for about an hour, so that the patient endures the biting sensation and the application until the biting sensation ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand to the instrument and wipe the hot water from the entire arm with cool water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave it for three days and place a bandage on it until the discoloration from the application fades, and leave it like this for several more days until pus formation ceases; this is beneficial for recovery.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then care for it with remedies until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends into the chest or abdomen, place the patient in the position where they contain water, as is done with the hand.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of boiled water, and I have already written about it in the chapter on the preparation of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and soda not yet extinguished, both in equal parts; mix them and pour into a new vessel which has a small hole at the bottom through which it can run according to the quantity needed for the remedy.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place under the bottom of the vessel another inverted vessel, and pour over that alkali and live soda with lukewarm water in which they absorb one finger's width, and then when you understand them to be warm by good compression, leave the hole through which the sharp water descends into the lower part of the inverted vessel.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then concentrate all that water, and pour it over fresh soda and alkali, because at this time it will have great strength, which is used in various medical procedures and in cauterizing other limbs, as a fire operation.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And for some medicines that are used for wide cauterization, such as vinegar and honey mixed with aniseed and soda, they should be blended.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And here is the account of a man from ancient times regarding the operation and cure for treating pain in the sciatic vein and nerve; he praises it highly as being sufficient without needing any other treatment, since it heals completely once performed, as recommended, and taking baths and exercise thereafter.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And let it be applied near the seat of pain, and if there is no green onion, take a fresh fig; and let it be crushed with a little grease and placed on the water in which the pain is, or on the head, or on the thigh, and let it be bound.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it be applied for the quantity of three hours or for the amount that the patient finds comfortable from the treatment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put him in the bath, and when his body is relaxed, move him to the sun, for the pain will cease and he will be healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cauterization with these medicines except after the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But Galen says that when the narrow vein is cauterized with the split leg of a kid, it benefits the youth very much; and let the cautery be applied in this way: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes and on the bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take a dried split leg of a goat and burn it in the fire until it turns to charcoal; and then place it on the wool and let it be spread over it.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this, and do not stop until the sensation of the bite reaches the water and the pain subsides.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called cow cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On Cauterization for Pain in the Thighs.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	In some cases, pain is in the two due to excessive causes, such as by seating or by percussion or by excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to those, by infusion of dry and moist matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery should not be used except in this single case, which is done by the application of dry matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, after evacuating the harmful matter, use thin pills and similar to them, which are made over the place where the pain is three lines according to its latitude, such that in each line there should be five cauteries or more, depending on what fits the patient's tolerance and the efficacy of the treatment.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let the cautery be made with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four with a middle-claw-shaped cautery according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On Cauterization at the Beginning of Ulceration.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	This disease often affects small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that it occurs on their structure, with swelling and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you will notice at the last vertebra of the spine and in the nodes that it is already beginning to rise above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that the cautery should be applied to the entire part of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be properly spaced between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then treat the area within it so that it heals as we have said, using what has been described.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But be careful not to administer the cautery on inflammation that is caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pains are caused by the friction of humors that flow into each limb, when pain occurs in the feet, it is customary for physicians to refer to this as gout properly speaking.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus, when gout caused by friction is treated with the method of treatment and not just the pains are alleviated, the cautery is applied to remove them.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And when you cauterize, do so for evacuation around the joint of the foot with the words "cauteris.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And it should be an olive-shaped cautery, which has the following form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make punctures on the fascia of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains ascend to the toes or other joints, and you find it necessary to address this, then cauterize each toe with three or four olive-shaped cauteries from all sides.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you must use cautery, and these cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize that area and do not press too hard with your hand before the cautery, but only around the circumference of the wound.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains reach into the abdomen and the groin, then administer the cautery which we have mentioned in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in one area and it is called sugar, then prick around the reddened areas as they spread, pricking those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the mentioned areas, then prick around the reddened areas on each knot and on the tip of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains reach near to the sides of the ribs or the muscles, then cauterize those areas from all parts as needed.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And if you do not evacuate the malady through proper regimen and reception of medicines, for if proper regimen is followed and phlegm is evacuated along with this cautery, it will heal, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On Cautery for Fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When you find a fracture in the hip and dislocation of the thighs in front of the pubis, and this begins from nearby, then it is necessary for you to order the patient to refrain from food on that day and to use laxatives so that the wound can open from the abdomen.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And the patient should stay near you on that day and command him to keep his leg elevated so that it is exposed or the pubis or thighs become visible.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And so return to those ribs which are called the false ribs, and mark the rupture upon the bone of the penultimate rib, where its extremity is like half a circle at the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then use the cautery, which has this shape:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	make sure it is hot and sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then reduce the bladder or towel to its contraction, and then place it on the area so that the bladder does not dry out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And you have already placed a pad between the patient's buttocks and below it put another pad, one serves under the armpits of the patient, and another under the feet of the patient, which should have its own pads.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery on that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and proceed until you feel the bone of the penultimate rib in the middle; and repeat if necessary another time if you did not succeed on the first attempt to reach the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe carefully the condition of the bladder during your cautery, so that you do not burn it, lest the patient dies or suffers another great harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when the cautery does not touch the bone, do not proceed with your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is appropriate that the cautery for children be delicate according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then take care of the location of the cautery for three days, applying dressings until the burn scar has healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And for its cure apply plasters among others inside which it may be healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And let the wound lie open on its back for forty days until it is sealed and the pus has cleared.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it should be that you pause the nutrition of him according to the length of time for the cure of which the intestines are within the belly, and that the bowel does not protrude due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when you wish to remove it after forty days, administer a properly made bandage, and keep him for other forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let him be restricted from work and overeating and drinking, and speaking loudly, for when he follows this regimen of complete healing, he will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will speak of the cure of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, if you do not want them to remain, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and let that which is excised from it be as thick as one third of it; and thereafter treat it as we have said, and it will not require adjustment.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some earlier ones said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, as it is marked by a template:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and a line is marked where you will proceed latitudinally in the skin above the rupture, and another line above it; then mark your hand with a nail-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On cauterization of torsion.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain occurs in any member due to falling or striking and that pain persists for a long time and is not relieved by medicine or cure, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And let the cautery be applied to every member according to its size and smallness, its strength and weakness, the location of the torsion, and the site of the pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If he is healed by the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then apply the cautery again. For it is customary with such pains that they are points of the member nearest to them, so you must achieve these points with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some cases of leprosy are greatly helped by cautery, but rarely when the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so when you wish to cauterize that patient, consider whether the leprosy is commissional and has been partially cured by what we have said in the division and does not continue, and if you fear for the patient that the corruption may encompass the whole body and its entirety, then cauterize it over the head with four cauteries: one at the middle of the head, and the second further down near the forehead; both on two temples; and one at the back, above the neck or nape.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally with the cauteries, apply them slightly enough to create a small impression on the bone, so that the scales are displaced and allow the expulsion of thick vapors; and cauterize over the wound as needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the body and is clearly visible, then it is necessary that you cauterize those areas with the cauteries which we have mentioned at the beginning; one cauterization on the tip of the nose, two on each cheek, two on each side of the neck vertebrae, six on the lower back vertebrae, one large cauterization near the buttocks, one on each buttock, two on each thigh, one on each calf, two on each ankle and one on each heel, and two on each foot arch. Cauterize those areas over all the joints of the mentioned limbs and feet, and on each sole of their feet, and on the hollows of their hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves that run over the heel so that you do not burn them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And in some cases, it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the little finger and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you apply cauteries, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as others do, because his body is already numbed.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or few according to the limbs and joints, depending on the type of tools used.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply the cautery with flour of fried chickpeas mixed with honey, and continue the treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On cauterization for fainting.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a limb is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb limb with cauteries according to the magnitude of the limb or the smallness of it.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let the fire for the cautery enter slightly under the surface of the skin.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with a remedy so that it may be healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes faintness is cauterized by treating certain points, which are mostly in the back and spine, and at the sites of the nerves that govern that limb, and thus the numbness is alleviated.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not proceed with this unless you are knowledgeable about the anatomy of the limb and the distribution of the nerves throughout the moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On cauterization of ulcers that are inflamed.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When an ulcer is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal remedies, then you should cauterize it with a cautery slightly above the surface according to the quantity of the depth under the skin until the whiteness and the color of it change.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with flour of eggs and lentils in rose oil and leaves of arnica, and the blood of dove or the blood of quail, taking an equal part of each and mixing them all together, and then apply a cloth soaked in this mixture until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter I.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On cauterizing wounds.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize that part with a cauterizing agent in the form of a circle around it as it appears.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise ones say that it should be cauterized with the final cautery in its proper place; but I have not seen this done, for I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have observed this in some cases.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is more correct to cauterize around the part in a circular manner as we have said, or rather as described.
Capitol .li.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On cauterizing abscesses.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an abscess is delayed in maturing, and this is due to the excessiveness of its formation or the condition of the patient, who is old and debilitated with little blood, or because of time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize around it with small punctures using a cautery instrument; and immediately apply something that will help it mature more quickly.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you wish to puncture it with a cautery, then choose the cautery that has this shape; and place it in the proper location of the abscess until it penetrates the core.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is applied to a location that is further away to spare the tissue of the arm; and then care for it until it heals.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LII.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On cauterizing with corrosives.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	A corrosive is a wandering corruption in the limb, which eats away just as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, when you see the corrosive in a place where it can withstand cautery with fire, then you ignite and cauterize small spots, and larger ones as is appropriate in the location where the corrosion is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And proceed to cauterize it thoroughly until you eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause for it to remain.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then dress it for three days, and apply ointment mixed with oil to the cauterized spots three times a day until all the scars are eradicated and all the corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat it with substances that promote flesh growth.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days you see that healthy flesh is growing where there is no corruption, it is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains in the corrupted areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And some corrosions are treated with sharp medicine, for that is the method instead of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But cautery with fire is quicker to provide relief.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already described the treatment with sharp medicine in the division above, so use that when you deem it necessary.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On cauterizing of nails and other similar cases.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	In many cases, when dealing with the parts of the foot affected by severe illness called gout, which is caused by thick and swollen matter, you should cauterize it; there are two ways to do this, one is cauterization with fire and the other is cauterization with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Cauterization with fire is done by igniting the cauterizing instrument shaped like a half moon, which should be made of iron according to the quantity that will contain the thick matter from all parts, and it should have fine edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place the ignited instrument over the thick matter, and then move your hand with the cauterizing instrument around the thick matter until the cauterization reaches the depth of the thick matter.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let that remain for three days until it begins to discharge pus.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a plaster made of crushed wild mugwort and salt to it, and leave the plaster on for one night, for this will help eradicate it from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a healing ointment for generating flesh until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and in many cases it occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, you should administer cauterization with hot water. Take a small tube made of iron or other material shaped like a half moon, and place it over the thick matter; then pour a little hot water into the tube and hold it with your hand while rotating it completely, pressing the edge of the tube against the root of the thick matter so that the hot water flows along the root of the thick matter. Wait for a short time after the application of the hot water for about an hour, and then remove it, as this will help eradicate the thick matter with its roots.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus you should approach each one that you may come upon all of which naturally in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And approach the care of those pus that the roots of the nails are eradicated with those remedies which the flesh generates.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the cautery for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you encounter any trembling due to irritation in the nerves or from fever causing irritation, or from some similar cause, it is then appropriate that you cauterize it with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cauterization; and at the feet of the patient, and above the stomach, use an olive-shaped cauterization.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of the patient subsides and the health hastens to overcome the illness.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LIV.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cautery for accidental injuries to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body there appear accidental swellings and sores that are caused by thick, corrupted matter; therefore, at the beginning when they appear, it is appropriate to be cauterized over the entire head of the fistula with a fine cautery made from myrtle wood, the tip of which is extended over fire; or with the long thorns of the erestologia plant; or with a lens-shaped cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes the cautery is also applied at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and if it does not occur as expected, the excess is disrupted by doing so, and heals from it.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it must be done near evacuation or phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On cauterization of blood flow caused by an accidental cut to an artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	If the flow of blood from an artery that has been cut is due to the disease that caused it before, or due to the beginning of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and similar cases, then it is difficult to remedy that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	When such a thing happens, quickly take your finger and place it over the opening of the artery, and press on it so tightly that the blood flow stops below your finger, and does not escape.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place in the fire some small and large cauteries made of olive wood, many of them, and blow on them until they are lit.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one of those cauteries, either small or large depending on the location and disease in which the artery is ruptured, and place it quickly after you have removed your finger, so that the blood is sealed and restricted.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove your finger and extract the cautery, then take another cautery quickly from those that are prepared in the fire, and continue doing this one after another until the blood is stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerve that is here, and make sure it does not cause other harm.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	Know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to restrain the blood at that time, especially if the artery is large, unless you use one of four methods: either use cauterization as mentioned before, or perform ligation when it cannot be extracted, for when it is extracted the extremities beyond it are burned and thus the blood is restrained; or apply a bandage soaked in strong vinegar or some other binding agent; or place them on medicines whose virtue is to constrict the blood; and strengthen this with a pillow and proper constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	He who administers proper restraint with bandages and compression using cloths or by placing them in positions away from burning causes and similar risks should do so carefully and slowly.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If one must act and no doctor or medicine is present, then gently press the index finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand the strong constriction inside so that the blood stops flowing from the main part of the wound, and do not move your finger over the artery; and sprinkle cold water over the artery until it becomes congealed and thickened; and then decide whether cauterization or medicine is necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On incisions and punctures and wind tumors and phlebotomy and wounds and their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	In the first chapter, we have already discussed all diseases in which cautery with fire is appropriate and burning medicine, as well as the occasions and causes for it, and the instruments necessary for the forms of cauterization; and I have arranged the chapters on the superiority of the head over the body.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	In this procedure in this chapter by that method, so that the patient may be praised for it, at the time concerning what he has asked.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, note, son, that in this chapter it is by fear what is in the first chapter about cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for that which is necessary to be in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many times evacuation of what is harmful to life depends on the aspersio of the vein or incision over the abscess or opening of exit or purging of the plague or extraction of a foreign body or incision of a stone and things similar to these.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And with all of those things accompany fear and trembling, and in the most of their danger death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that upon you does not fall that which is despair, for some times cases depend on your methods of dealing with people and many methods of treating illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And among them are some who become angry with their illness and are close to death because of the vehemence of what they find in their illness, and due to the length of the illness, and this illness brings fear which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among them is the one who gives you all his possessions and says, "I hope for health from you," while their actual illness is deadly.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore it is not right for you to consent to one who comes to you in this manner; and your caution should be greater than your greed and your rapacity; and do not presume any cause over that unless proper knowledge certain verifies it for you, and by which a commendable outcome succeeds.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	For the treatment of all your patients, make predictions and indications about which one is likely to be cured, for in that you will have assistance towards acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, children, may God inspire your minds and not take from you direction and protection, for these are in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have arranged this chapter distinctly by chapters as it follows the chapter on cauterization, concerning the treatment of the head among other parts, so that what you ask for and of which you have need may be made clear to you.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this disease often afflicts children after birth when the nurse presses too hard on the child's head.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it occurs due to a hidden cause that is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have seen this disease only in children; and in all those whom I treated, death followed, and thus it appeared to me that there was no cure for them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I saw a child whose head was filled with water, and the swelling of his head was so great that he could not move because of the size of his head, and before long the humidity increased until it caused death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity is either aggregated between the skin and the bone, or it accumulates below the bone on the cranium.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For when the operation is to be performed and the humidity lies between the cartilage and the bone and the abscess is small, at that time you should make an incision in the middle part of the head along its length, and let this cleft run for about two nights where the moisture flows, and this is the shape of the spatum:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the humidity has increased and the abscess is larger, then at this point there are two clefts made in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is below the bone, the sign of this is that you see the sutures of the head swollen all around and the fluid is squeezed out when you press it with your hand at the edges but not in the middle where it is hidden.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	You should make three incisions in the middle part of the head according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And immediately after the incision, extract all the moisture; then dress the clefts with cloth and wool; afterwards apply ointment made of oil and wine over it from the fifth day, and then loosen the bandage and treat the wound with lint and herbs, and dress the head symmetrically; eat food that is dry with little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which you should consider based on the size of the abscess and the collection of fluid, for sometimes it is more in the occipital region, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left; therefore, pay attention to where the incision should be made according to where the abscess appears and the accumulation of fluid, and do this as best suits you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and ensure flows of blood and prolong the treatment by that flow of blood for evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On the cutting of arteries which are near the ears, called hilasseysse.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Second.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When I proceed to the treatment of catarrhs or rheums in the legs or feet, and if it is ancient, and do not rely on that for the cure with medicines, then the last cure in this case is at the beginning of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore it is necessary when you wish to cut those that the patient shows his head, and then rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear; and then secure the neck of the patient with a cloth; and then press to find the pulse; and the locations of each near the areas which are close to the ears, and they are hidden in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then press on the artery with your finger, and then cut each one with a sharp scalpel at an angle of incision penetrating to the bone, and this should be done along the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the scalpel below the artery and cut it where the incisions are from above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers' width, for when an artery is cut the blood comes out in a pulsating ejection, which flows out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the artery does not appear at the incision site, now you should measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers, and then mark with a probe, and make it enter into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And the amount of blood that should be let is a quantity of wine one uncia, and more or less according to how much appears of the patient's constitution and the fullness of the artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the condition, and if any cause of swelling remains on the bone, now incise that so it does not become an abscess due to cauterization.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then support the swelling with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and then treat it with applications until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of arteries that are in the limbs.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When it happens that someone suffers from acute migraines or sharp headaches due to excessive moisture in the body and similar qualities in the veins of the limbs, or if these conditions are very severe and do not respond to treatment with medical remedies, then we resort to bloodletting from the arteries in the limbs or cauterization of those areas as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction of those arteries is that the patient shaves the hair where it is on the limbs; and understand the artery that appears on the limb as it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden in only a few people due to the strength of friction.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then tie the neck of the diseased area with some cloth; and afterwards rub the place with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until it becomes apparent to you clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And now take the spatum, which has this form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then carefully peel the membrane with ease until you reach the artery; and then place it where it belongs and extract it from the parts above until you have removed it from the membrane and reveal the tunics that are beneath it, from all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is fine, then wrap it at its extremity with a ligature, and then cut a part of it according to the amount by which the ends need to be lengthened or contracted, and there will not be any flow of blood, for if they are not cut as such, the blood will not rise properly.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then remove one ounce of blood up to three ounces.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then make sure to tie it in two places with a double strong thread of flax or with long cords, and do not allow it to rot before the consolidation of the wound and thus cause a flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut away the excess that is between the two ligatures; and do this either at that hour or at another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone or use a knife-shaped cautery until the ends are cut, and this will serve as the place of that work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better if the patient has a fever or is of heated complexion; for cautery is among those causes that aid in finishing off humidity, and therefore it is better in such cases.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And it is appropriate for the extraction of arteries that people prepare the place as if for an old wound, and they should be laid on decently prepared poultices, and nearby there should be ready dry medicines that cause flesh to grow and warm applications within so that it may heal.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if during the procedure blood starts flowing from the artery, then you should act to constrict that blood, either with cautery or by filling the place as for a wound, and tighten your hand so that the blood is restrained.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes is present to you, then press your thumb on the place until the blood is constricted, and wrap the area with water of strong coldness until the pain subsides, and tighten it as needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is more important in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives, after you mark the two places with a tenta, and then place some fire between them until it reaches the bone and divides the vein into two places, so that you can stretch what is between its extremities, as they are not completely consolidated with this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two knives should be exemplary.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if you make them slightly less sharp than two knives, it is better, for if they are as sharp as two knives, they may approach each fracture too quickly and cut through the flesh too rapidly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Thus, when there is swelling in those areas, the heat of the flame is applied to them and the flesh is quickly excised.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all other works and more swift.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the spaces which are between two ribs be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of acute and acidic tears of the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are acidic tears, and the condition affects those veins which run over the top of the head, and if you do not find any cause for treatment with medicine in this matter, sometimes the face of the patient becomes red, and a sensation as if ants were moving is felt on their forehead, and their eyes from such pain become extremely weakened, they weep so much that even their eyelashes can be seen clearly, and the eyelids are scorched by the sharpness of the tears. In this kind of operation, ancient practitioners used harsh methods in treating these conditions, and did not consider this treatment to be without suffering.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to pluck out the hairs that are on their forehead, and then you make three incisions in the forehead equally spaced according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length slightly behind the movement of the tears which flow through the tear duct, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful not to cut into the arteries that run on both sides, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three of those adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of prepared sponge or dry cloth with which you can absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatula between two sharp points, which is the shape of the incision of it:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the part between the plates to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise from that all the tissue which is between two incisions with the knife which is over the bone, and then do this for the middle incision to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then stretch it with this spatula and insert into the first incision another time with another instrument which is called a chisel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the sharp edge on the flesh adjacent to the tissue, and the flat edge within the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle fissure, and dissect with that all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	But let the incision continue to where it appears in the tissue, and then do this in the middle fissure to the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the amount of bleeding is equal, press the places of the collected blood clots.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place in each fissure a piece of old wood charcoal, and place over them powders soaked in vinegar and oil and sweet wine, and bandages so that no abscess forms.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day remove the bandage and administer a great infusion of hot water or chamomile, and then treat it with an ointment of basil and rose oil and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of phlegm through catharsis and the expulsion of ascending humors from the internal parts of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When you encounter acute and continuous bleeding through catharsis, and often the humors of the patient are weak and small, and their condition indicates debility, with the eyelids ulcerated and hair loss from the area, and in front of the head there is sharp pain and subsequent exhaustion, then you should understand from these symptoms that the matter and catharsis do not come but from veins in the internal parts.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for these conditions is as follows: command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in that area at its midpoint, a small one lengthwise (beginning from the left temple towards the right temple; and this cut should go through the bone; extend your hand between the temples, which are slightly above the place of chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth and then apply between the two edges of the incision with old lint or strips of cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply above it powders enclosed in oil to ensure that no harmful swelling or abscess occurs.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you remove this and see that the abscess has already diminished, now cover it so that it scabs over where new flesh begins to grow, and then treat it with a drying regimen that promotes flesh growth. For example, take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colocynth, mix them together, and make a plaster from this mixture to apply to these wounds until the flesh is regenerated.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the treatment of what affects the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Any cause that affects the ears is one of four types: either it is a mineral stone or something similar to a stone such as iron or wood, or it is from a plant such as chaff or beans, or it is fluid-like such as water and sour wine or their equivalents, or it is some kind of animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore, when a stone affects the ear or any other cause similar to those causes that do not adhere but rather get stuck in the ear, then expose the ear to the sun, and if you see the stone, at that moment drop some substance like violet oil or cumin into it, and shortly after administer its extraction with cold compresses, and make them sneeze by causing a runny nose due to the act of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place around the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear upwards towards the sides, as moving it in this way often helps with these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not expelled, then administer its extraction with an instrument called a gentle epistome, which has the following form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is expelled with the instrument, that is good; and if not, then administer its extraction with a gentle force of several attempts.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore, if it is not expelled by these methods, then make a tube of reed and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal, and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that nothing but the tube enters.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	From a nearby extract of the treatise on veins with a strong attraction, for troops accustomed as we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If it is not forgotten in this manner, now take a thin piece of cloth or some prepared material with which birds are usually caught, and place that small amount at the end of the vein, and then wrap that area properly paused.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert it into the canal of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of its humidity.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it is not forgotten with all the causes that we have recounted, now you should proceed to cut that area before it becomes an abscess, boil, or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of cutting that area is to start by puncturing the vein called sephasica and extract the blood according to the manner appropriate for it, and then make a small incision between your fingers and turn the ear towards the upper parts, and make a slight cut at the edge of the ear in the place most suitable for it.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the cut be in a crescent shape until it reaches the stone, and once the stone is located, remove it if possible with appropriate instruments; then close the incision quickly at that time, and care for it until it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause within the ear is one of the growths that have become inflamed, now administer the treatment and the extraction of it; but if you do not proceed accordingly, then take fine powder according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer the removal of that growth which is lodged in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	If you do not think that it has already been moistened by the vapor from the lamp, place it in several pieces, and press extracts onto them either at the incisions or with fine gloves, as we have said before, for this is a gentle way of applying the extract.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	In the water that has entered into the ear, it is convenient for the patient to use sneezing as a condition at the beginning, and fill his hollowed-out ear with some old cotton, and keep this over the ear in which the water is. If it is thereby expelled, it is good; but if not, now take small stones or lead pieces according to the length of one's finger, and heat them in the fire a little, and let the patient insert one of these into the channel of his ear and jump on that side with a part of his body, and strike upon the stone inside the ear with another stone.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Do not remove the stone inside until all the water is expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And the water will be expelled in this way: take paper or wool, and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end over a fire until most of it is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And place another piece of wool in it and do this as many times as necessary until all the water is expelled, and stir it with a tube as was said above about the extracting stone.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of an animal entering into that ear, if it is a small thing, proceed as we have said in the division; but if it is a large object causing pain to the patient, then administer the extraction with gloves and incisions, and the cause of this is more serious than all other causes that enter the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it with what we have said in the division and in the chapter on distillations and do not compromise your treatment, then you should expose the ear to the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if there appears any cause of the worms, then extract it with gentle movements or with fine suction tubes; but if no cause appears, then take a tube that is narrow below and wide above, which has this shape:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the fine end into the ear according to the amount that will suffice for the patient; and then suck strongly with that tube several times until all the worms are removed.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if you do not follow this method, then plug and seal around the tube with wax as we have said; then administer distillations that have already been proven effective in treating worms, which you will find described in the chapter on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And use the application with which you pour medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, which has this shape:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or iron, narrow below, with a small hole, and flat above.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And it should be like a plunger that fits snugly within the hollow part of the tube where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take a reed and wrap its end neatly with cloth, then pour oil into the hollow part of the ear, or juice from some herb, or any of these medicines into the tube — which is in the ear —, then insert the reed with the wrapped end above and press it gently with your hand until the oil is expelled into the hollow part of the hearing and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	Let it be soaked in oil which has already been heated over fire a little.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the reason why you will distill into the ear is not too harsh, for medicines for the ear do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear obstruction.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes some children are born from their mothers' wombs unperfored, and this also happens in some adults, where there is an obstruction in the ear canal due to a growth or flesh; and this obstruction sometimes occurs at the entrance of the ear canal, which cannot be seen clearly, and sometimes it is located outside.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs at the entrance of the ear canal, which cannot be seen clearly, is in the majority of cases difficult to treat.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that case where you can see clearly, it is necessary to expose the ear of the patient to the sun and observe it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see an obstruction clearly, open it with a fine spatula of this form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the tip of it where it is narrow, with one side sharp and the other not; and the spatula should be double-edged so as not to cause damage to the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the obstruction is due to flesh grown in the ear or in the canal, then use fine forceps and carefully cut away all the flesh within.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if there is an obstruction in the ear canal, then take a thin reed and heat it slightly over fire, and then insert it into the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you feel an obstruction with what the patient finds easy to reach due to difficulty in hearing, try to force the obstruction out with what is easily accessible; and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place in the ear a piece of cloth dipped in the quantity appropriate to the size of the wound, which you have wrapped in Egyptian cotton; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the injury; or take something that can be soaked in water and powdered with finely ground herbs and use it; and if you see the ear already inflamed, then remove what was there and replace it with something wrapped in wax mixed with rose oil, until the inflammation subsides; and afterward treat it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if there is bleeding, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that stops the flow of blood, which is described in the chapter on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of boils that occur on the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Boils that occur on the eyelids are sometimes moist, and at other times they are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you should have those (boils) ready in small containers or jars, and then incise them with the edge of their roots, and afterward apply finely powdered herbs to the areas.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If there is pain and a flow of blood from the veins, then at that hour you should cauterize those places which are suitable for cauterization under the clavicle.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is near the incisions and wounds return when there remains some cause for them; and when they are cauterized with fire, those causes are consumed and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for an ailment that affects the eyelids.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Wounds that remain in the eyelids due to some cause similar to a severe condition in its strength and hardness, and for this reason it is called severe.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an aggregation of thick moisture in the eyelid both above and below.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the treatment for this is to consider at that moment whether the severity arises from what appears on the surface of the eyelid and affects it entirely; and the cause of this is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, apply something over that area along the length of the fissure, and then carefully remove it entirely with ease until it is evacuated, and then suspend it with an ointment and bandage it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not prepared for the initial treatment and pus penetrates the eyelid through an incision bit by bit, then this is not noted as any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the condition is severe, then you should adjust it with stitches; and take care of it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is minor, no harm will come to you from that because the warmth of treatment restores and heals it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is inclining towards the inner parts of the eyelid, you should lift the surface inwardly so that the eyelid suspends the swelling and presses it from all sides; and if the eyelid because of this incision is stretched out, do not attribute this to any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And after the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with something that heals so that it may be healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	About the treatment around the eye above the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath is a condition that arises in the layers of the eyelid above, and it occurs more commonly in children. It aggravates their wounds and causes them to suffer from catarrh due to death; they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears continuously collect in their eyes.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And because of this, you see them pressing their faces all the time, and they sleep with their faces pressed down; and above their lower eyelids are wet eyebrows, which have been covered by inflammation, and the impending formation of acirnath is apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel acirnath within them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And there is a method of operation for when the patient rests their head in your lap, and you place a cloth over them and make a circle according to the quantity that contains arthernach from all sides, and then place it on that area and press with your fingers all around so that acernath aggregates in the middle of the circle, and then introduce moisture into the opening using spatum incident along the latitude, and the incision should not be larger than the incision made in flavotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	In the middle of the incision which you make in the bone, proceed until you reach the marrow, for in major dislocations you will find marrow by means of a fracture according to the form of white fat.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract that which you wrapped in the cloths between your said parts and roll it between your right and left hands until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to probe too deeply into the fracture so that you do not reach the brain, and avoid doing so.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if the blood does not appear to you at the beginning of the fracture, then probe gently into the fracture until you encounter blood; and then extract it as we have said; and subsequently dip cloths in warm water and vinegar and place them over the area and sprinkle with powder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And some people sprinkle salt and place it in the concavity of the fracture so that what remains will absorb this humidity.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an abscess occurs in the area, then treat it with soft plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On the methods of examining the brain.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When there are white patches among the eyelashes that grow below the natural lashes and become old, these affect the brain and cause various illnesses such as continuous tears and softening of the eyelids and membrane, which can lead to brain damage known as "tactinir del huel." Treatment is done in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or using sharp medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization; or it is performed through incision and suturing; or by means of tubes, as I will explain.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Therefore, when you place the head of the patient in such a position; turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it turns well, that is good; but if not, insert a needle into the one which contains pus below the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate to the pus from above, and this should be — near the edge of the eyelid where hair grows — near the hair, and draw out the pus to the parts above with the eyelid, and turn that part with the ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then probe in the part inside of the eyelid below the hair towards the spatum incident to the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor; and then extract the pus and place below the eyelid small particles of wood or cloth, and then bandage over the eyelid with a piece of cloth, and it should be like the figure of a leaf of myrtle.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it must be the figure according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, for this already varies among people, since there are those whom you need to incise from the eyelid a great quantity according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then probe with the probe on both lines which you have marked, and begin from the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fissure near the natural hair is as thick as that of the king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the incision at one of the two angles of the chain, and then excoriate that completely, and then apply to the wound both lips with wool grease, and wipe away the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous of the pus on two eyebrows with some viscous causes, if you wish to do this, and otherwise, do not worry.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	About four days after sewing up the intestines, start the cure with this liquid.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, treat the wound without suturing it, and cure that with a liquid that dries and contracts, since the eyelid is elevated due to the sealing of the wound and the accumulation of pus; but suturing is better. This is what the ancients recommended.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, let there be careful attention regarding the condition, and it is of good practice, and there should not be fear in it.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method for treating it, and it involves marking on the eyelid in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and then lifting the eyelid with three small instruments shaped according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible to use those instruments, take a needle with thread and place it in the center of the figure, then insert the other needle near the larger tear duct, and the second near the smaller tear duct, and adjust between these needles the eyelids evenly, and then lift your hand in an even motion, lifting the entire marked area as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then align the two edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if an abscess occurs from your incision or your wound, treat that abscess with cerate and something similar, and frequently.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes you will find that the eyelid has its hairs turned back; then it is necessary for you to use what we have said about incision; but suturing in such cases is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To make a reed needle according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And when you convert the eyelid and cut the figure that is inside as I have recounted; then by art make two reeds or two slender sticks whose length shall be according to the length of the eyelid and the width of which shall be slighter than the width of the pupil.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already cut at the extremities of each partition, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then apply each one with subtlety over what is superfluous of the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the reeds in each partition tightly, and leave it for several days, because the concretion from the constriction will die off and be discarded and will dry up until it falls off by itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, now break it with tweezers, and then treat the wound until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Then when it is healed, the eyelid is raised and the threads do not sting.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two reeds that you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and the quantity of the length and width should neither be more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On Removing Stinging Hairs from the Eye with a Needle When the Hair is Firmly Embedded.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When there are unnatural hairs, hard and rough, that sting the eyes, then the procedure is that you take a fine needle and place it in the hair root finely and gently, and then adjust the ends of it carefully and hold each one in a very subtle manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be equal to the quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then prepare another fine thread below it briefly, and use the ends of that one if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the malice of its head in your hand, and do it near the sun so that your work may be clear, for this is a subtle and intricate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that needs to be transplanted, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before you remove it from above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair in from above and insert it into the recipient site, and let there be one or two or three hairs and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand gently so that the hair is moved into place on the recipient site on the eyelid with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is pulled on the recipient site and the hair does not move into place, pull the recipient site towards the thread that you have prepared with it, so that it moves into place from the excess trauma.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And look at it with the eye, for now you will pull the recipient site and the thread, and tie each one securely, and leave the ties for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows on that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter, now you should take one long hair from among the natural hairs and place it there, or leave it so that it grows in some space near by, and then raise it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of an abscess that occurs in the upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When an abscess occurs in the eye, and it is contracted when the eyelid is closed, either to the right or left side, due to poor healing of wounds or incisions or cauterizations, it is called leporine. This kind of abscess can be either natural or accidental, caused by poor healing of wounds, incisions, or cauterizations, or similar malpractices.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation is such that you should cut open that consolidation and separate its lips, then place between them a piece of linen cloth, and bind it there until it heals.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not advisable to use treatments for it that dry out or constrain it, because if you do this, the abscess will return with pus worse than before, no matter how much time passes.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use treatments that soften it, such as fenugreek, and apply the water in which its leaves and seeds have been boiled, or juice from dill, which should be mixed with some oil to make it liquid, then immerse the cloth in this mixture and use it for treatment.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The treasure of your treatment is that you should puncture any part that has not yet healed according to the form it had at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have described is nothing but a correction of an abscess that does not return to its original form as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the treatment of ehacrati which is done on the eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This ehacrati which is done on the lower eyelid, which is properly named ehacrati; and it can be either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	The accidental one is caused by a plague or a tear or cauterization or other similar reasons.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation is that you take a needle with which to make a double thread, and place it in the flesh, and pass it from the left lacrimal bone to the right lacrimal bone, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then stretch the flesh in the parts above with the needle and cut along with the needle using a broad spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then if you return the shape of the eyelid as needed, it is good; and if not, take a rod and place it in the incised figure, and use that to convert the eyelid, and close both openings on the side of the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two openings be at two corners of the incision you have made where they meet, and let their corner form a shape when they come together.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then remove the flesh in the quantity of its width below, what shrinks the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with linen thread; and then treat those as we have said regarding softening medicines and poultices until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if through excision, incision, or cautery you have reached the place where a fissure, suture, or cauterization is needed, then you should make a flat incision above the eyelashes as has been demonstrated previously.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the membrane between the two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the speech on the treatment of excisions when they are above or below, let it proceed according to the operation, as it is prepared in the form of an excision, and that one is in the form of various shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled practitioners always prepare in every possible way within themselves to return the figure to its natural form or close to it, and that patient according to the convenience of the operation and the instruments in the major dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in certain individuals such that the eyelid is adhered above to the sclera, and its movement and natural functions are restricted, then you should introduce a probe below the eyelid, elevate it with it, or extend it to the root.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you should incise the adherence with a fine probe, which should not be sharp at its tip, holding it bluntly so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and move the probe gently so as not to damage the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be such that it easily separates the adherence, allowing the eyelid to return to its natural form, and ensuring that the entire adherence is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And you should put in the wound salt water with which you wash; or distill in that of rose dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the wound with a clean instrument, and place on the wound linen infused in egg white, and after the third day use consolidating treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the incision of the nail and on the swelling of the flesh around the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the nail is of two kinds, for it is either nervous, and resembles a hard transparent shell; or non-nervous, resembling frozen white moisture, which when touched by iron does not easily take any impression, is severed and the iron is not imbedded in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both kinds do not begin except from the larger tear duct gradually covering the eye and preventing light and the movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	But the method of working in the incision is that the patient places his head in your lap, and then opens his eyes, and raises the eyelid with your hand, and then collects the nail with slight duplication and extends it to the parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert into it a horsehair or oxhair or cowhair, or something similar, or strong glue, and duplicate the tip of the needle slightly and place it in the center of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and bind it with glue; and extend it to the parts above, and rub against the hair the edge of the nail which covers the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And so you should follow with the skin to the rear part of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you should incise the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small forceps, and leave the flesh of the tear duct naturally without which, due to that incision, it would not become subject to continuous tearing.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes apply ointment to the area that has been spread out or with honey, as we have said, and then remove it with a lion-shaped spatula, which is shaped like this:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal membrane and cause a rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	After the incision, place a little powdered salt or clean linen made of silk in it, and leave that for another day; then treat it with whatever is needed until it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the ointment does not cause irritation and you cannot insert a needle, nor is it placed on that area, then this type of ointment is treated with medicines, and it heals in this way as mentioned and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise that area, then open the wound of the patient and take a fine, sharp spatula in the shape as follows:
am subtilitat.	with delicacy.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you find that it is rarefied and condensed and applied to the root, then distill from your own saliva on the wound made of silk or clean cloth or powdered salt, and dress the wound for another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then proceed with the operation such that everything inside it is cleaned out, except for the opposite abscess which is on the other side; at that time you leave that one alone and treat the beginning of the abscess until it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then proceed with your operation on that one for the reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if it is painful in the eye to a great degree, should be suspended at once; and incise part of that one, and do not complete the incision so as not to incise the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a distilled liquid made of rose and sinjer (a type of oil or ointment) to the lacrimal region until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of styes and of what is born from flesh tightly attached to the eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	In some cases on the eyes of some people, flesh grows, and it is raised until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids and severely pulls the eyelids apart in various parts and is assembled like a small turret.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation there is that the patient places his head in your lap; then open the eyes of that person and collect all that flesh at once appropriately, and with this use forceps or tweezers; then incise the flesh at the beginning until it is completely finished with the scissors, and be careful not to scratch the eye during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision should be with the scalpel we have recommended for nail incisions, or with small tweezers with which hair is plucked, depending on the form that will come next according to this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Thus, when your incision is complete and the flesh around it is swollen, now fill the wound with finely crushed salt or sprinkle on red powder similar to corrosive medicines, and apply over it a white cloth to ensure protection from abscesses and cautery.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any cause arises to guard against bleeding and the wound is in danger of becoming cauterized, and you fear an abscess from cautery, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess with whatever remedy will cure it, and subsequently proceed with the operation once again as soon as it has healed, and similarly handle the flesh around this type of wound.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you should be cautious about removing all healing from the wound naturally or accidentally; use tools of iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member can withstand the operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the Collection of Pus in the Wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Pus comes from red veins that are swollen over the wound and prohibit its healing, and the wound will become inflamed over a length of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the wound in which pus is present is strong and there is no other illness but pus, then you should collect that pus.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to place their head in your lap, and then press those veins for one ounce or two seconds according to your discretion; and let that pressing be gentle and gradual as follows:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or press for two ounces gradually in one action according to this method:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And bind those veins with fine ligatures, with subtlety, and cleanse the blood hour by hour until you see those veins become empty and be turned back.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful that you do not lead the blood to the extremities of the body; and if your operation is in the morning before the sun, and be firm in your operation so as not to incise except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed it, then you distill in the blood pure green or red herbs because of their sharpness to dissolve what is hardened in the body.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if this is not possible for you to do at that hour, then apply everything with what alleviates his pain, and leave him for several days until the pain subsides and he is assured of no abscess forming.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat upon him according to the same method until he is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of nasal fractures.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat fractures with cauterization or with sharp burning medicine as described and it has not healed, then do not let it remain unattended but cut into the abscess after its maturity, and remove all the humidity that is within it and the pus until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then you should treat it with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	He is called the rough head, and it is made of horn, and its head is round just like this one which is made with points by puncturing with a lime or al-iskhafat with subtle punctures (as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Place it on the corrupted part of the bone, and then rotate it among the said tissues, and press your hand gently little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped off.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And do this several times, and then treat the area with astringent and drying agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	When the area is consolidated and good flesh has grown in it, and the core of the unhealthy tissue has been removed and it remains for forty days without being renewed or forming an abscess, and no accident occurs, then you know that it has healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, now it is not about generating anything new but reducing the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you expose the bone either with force or with sharp medicine, and when the bone is exposed, then you place three pieces in this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the extremity of the iron be triangular, and the shaft of the iron be gradually narrowed into the extremity just as you see here.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place it on the bone, and let it be near the lacrimal bone; extend your hand a little, and then rotate your hand around the three pieces until it penetrates all of the bone, and you will feel the pain because you will notice air escaping when you press it.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Now treat the area with astringent and drying medicines as you have been instructed.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh and the place become hardened, at that moment the matter which was discharged to the surroundings returns to the nose, thus it is easier on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the prominence of the eye.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the eye protrudes entirely and no harm or diminution occurs to the vision, then it is appropriate to treat the patient, and subsequently follow them; then apply windy plasters to the head without incision and let it drain well through suction; and afterward, apply a liniment on the eye made of aloes, rose petals, myrtle berries, and sarcocolla; then strengthen the plaster over the eye using powdered substances.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method for making the powders is to take linen cloths made of the said substances, and each cloth should be folded into four parts; then make the powder from these materials.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then apply those one over the other according to the amount the eye requires.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then apply a hard cloth with tight binding over them; and repeat the plasters and suction without incision; then remove the plasters and let the eye be tightly bandaged day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if the ligature becomes loose during this time, then it should be made tight again.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then remove the ligature day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if you see the eye already reduced, that is good, and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders, binding, and plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the prominence of the uvea.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When you discover disruption in the uvea, and it is prominent and protrudes beyond the eyelids like a grain of barley, and its shape resembles that of a person as described. If you wish to incise this, then during the operation proceed as we have recounted: insert the needle at the edge of the uvea from below upwards, and subsequently place another needle where the double thread is, near the lacrimal area; allow one needle to penetrate while keeping the first needle in its position. Then, incise the location of the double thread and lift that part of the uvea along the course of the needle, and strengthen this motion.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then withdraw the needle and apply it to the prepared lamb’s fleece soaked in egg white, and allow it to remain there until the thread is with the uvea.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then treat the wound with what comforts it until the injury is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes it is advisable to gather from all sides with a circular piece of cloth around the wound for a large prominence, and then pierce it with a fine probe that reaches the base of the wound, allowing the albuminous moisture to flow out, and the wound will soon descend.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Then strengthen it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of contusions.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness, called alconati, is not actually water descending on the wound but rather a condition that affects the wound in a manner similar to it.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	Here is the translation:
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not go down below, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the drainage to the sinus with water as we have said does not happen, now make the patient sit and take a thin spatula and apply it over the pannicular area, close to the junction of the conjunctiva and corneal tunic at the limbus, so that the pus is discharged.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once it is discharged, now you should apply hot water in which honey has been mixed or water in which fenugreek and honey have already been boiled.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water descending from the eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the types of water in the division and which are suitable for piercing, as explained earlier, now do so according to the patient's condition.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now you should make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and pull the affected eye with gentle force.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand near the eyelid of the affected eye if the water is in the left eye; or use your right hand if it is the right eye.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take an almond if the eye is left; or with your left hand if the eye is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the tip of the almond near the limbus along the thickness of the white of the eye from the side of the smallest tear duct, and then press the almond gently while moving your hand around it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And so proceed to the white of the eye, and feel that the almond is already reached because it is round.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And measure the path from the almond to the pupil, which is the space between the pupil and the end of the darkness, which is the rim of the eye; for you will see that through the pupil with the clarity of the corneal tissue.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And so place the almond in the location where the fluid is, and then pull it down into another area nearby, and if the fluid descends immediately, you will see the defect on which his vision depends immediately, and the almond in its eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a moment; if the fluid has descended, now you should pull that other area before the almond is displaced.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it has settled and does not descend, now you extract the almond with ease, and turn your hand little by little, and then dissolve a small amount of clear salt from a gem in the fluid and wash the eye thoroughly with it; and then place over the eye a piece of cloth or stopper or wool infused in rose oil and egg white.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we and those of our time place over it a dressing soaked in egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the almond does not obey and enter the instrument of the eye due to its hardness—since there are some people whose eye is hard—you should then take the spatula, which is called an alberid, which has this form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And so pierce with that the conjunction, and do not stop your hand in the track, until you make a way for the almond to move.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And here he enters the almond as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should prepare the patient for the operation by having them sleep on their back in a dark room, and prevent any movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in the nature of the water so that its nature becomes smooth, and do not move their head to the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the bandaging be according to its condition on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then untie it in that dark room and show the patient the wound, explain some causes to them, and then rebandage it on day seven.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not do this during the hour of healing or soon after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Handle this so that the water can flow freely and quickly due to great and strong attention.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess occurs, then you should untie the bandage before the seventh day and treat it with water to help the abscess drain.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Now you should cover the wound and pause on its surface for several days through which the healing occurs, keeping it in a dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then gradually move them from that room and converse with them about their condition.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in alchemy, the disciple is not exempt from observation several times, and now you should be confident about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And I have come to us from some of those among whom it is customary, and some said that they make fire in the Airac [orifice] when it has been perforated through which water flows.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But for my part I have not seen anyone in our land who has done this, nor have I read about it in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is something new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of orifices so that those who are unaware of them may understand them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or proper steel, and their extremities are crafted with this subtlety in a triangular shape, the sharp end exactly as it is formed.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of flesh wounds on the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When on the nose there arise various flesh growths that are attached, among which there is one cause that resembles a spider web of heavy threads, or a water polyp; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles such a water creature.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from it is cancerous flesh, ulcerated, of dark color; and there is also flesh that resembles a lion's but not of a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, for the one who has these flesh growths that are not fraudulent or cancerous, it is advisable to make the patient sit between your hands and place it in the sun, and starve the nostrils of them, and apply poultices occasionally to those flesh growths.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that from the inner parts, and then carefully cut away what you have identified of those parts with a sharp, subtle spatula until you know that all the flesh has been removed; if it remains for any reason by which excision is possible, at that time remove it with one of the fine instruments with ease so that nothing remains.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the master decides to treat an abscess or ulcer with cautery, then pause at that which is necessary; or if it is one of malignant ulcers, then cut and cauterize that part where the blood vessels have been divided and all cavities are drained.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And if it is necessary to incise near the nose at a place where there is blood or pus.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is swollen and the process of moisture extends into the palate, then you will know that it has healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture does not penetrate as needed, then you will know that deep within there is flesh that has remained on the surplus bones of the nose to which incision has not reached.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, it is necessary to insert some thick substance into the place where there is swelling, and use small pieces of cloth, placing an amount equal to the width of a finger or less between each piece, and create openings so that one end of the substance can be placed in the nose either with a probe or for another reason that is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after this has been done, draw the smell into the passages of the nose so that it settles on his sense of smell, for well-trained people perform this action as children do in schools, and it is an easy cause for those who want to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place the two ends of the substance, one end extending outside the nose and the other remaining inside the nose, and subsequently apply a piece of flesh over the cloth that covers the substance, and do this until you know that the flesh is covering the cloths around the substance.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	From the root extract the essence, and place in the nose near the extraction of blood a tube, and do this for three days or more until it consumes all that is around the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the treatment, place in the nose a lead tube for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you prefer a drying treatment, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument for making enemas, with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make this of silver or gold, which should resemble a small tube, like a small trumpet, and the opening similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed tube like a reed, and the tube of the instrument for making enemas should be flat and open; to which attach a handle at the back, with which you can hold it when heating in oil or whatever you want from juices and suctionable causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this enema is precious: the recipe for an enema of castor oil, white myrrh, ginger, saffron pepper, long pepper, spikenard, and a single spice in equal amounts of one ounce each. Mix with juice from wheat and cabbage, and make pills; then dissolve one pill in boiled water, and administer it to the patient lying down through the nose.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	About the veins in the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Most bruises occur in the extremities of the nose, and they are magnified and treated within a few days until such time as it is seen fit to attend to them.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason, you should address it at the beginning of its appearance and treat all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then focus on the place where you cauterize or use medicinal remedies that burn, which are applied there.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if the treatment is delayed until it has become magnified, then consider whether it is hardened, firm, dark in color, and insensitive. At this point, do not touch it with an iron instrument, as doing so might cause severe damage to the one performing the procedure; for many injuries occur due to such careless handling of the condition.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is soft to the touch and not dark in color, and it is possible to treat it at any location without fear, then evacuate the pus and incise it without hesitation, and care for the area with remedies that dry and heal until it is fully healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On sewing the nose and lips and ear when the continuity is disrupted by plague or similar causes.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when a disruption in continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, few people are skilled in such an operation.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when dealing with any cause of this nature, you should consider whether it is a fresh wound or due to blood loss. Then, you should approximate the two edges of the wound with stitches and subsequently care for it until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of a wound of continuity are already separated and each one is made whole, now you must scrape each part of its apparent edge until it becomes clean.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips with sutures and strengthen them, and over them sprinkle powder of dragon’s blood and thrice daily apply a plaster of mastic or some other consolidating plaster. Let that lie for two days or three, and then remove it and change the plaster until the pus has ceased to discharge, and then treat with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The method of the suture is that you add the wound of continuity either with needles as we have recommended for the suture of the abdomen, or you may join the wound of continuity with thread as you see fit.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the extraction of those causes that appear in the two lips in their inner parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Often in some men in the inner parts of their lips there appear certain hard abscesses resembling flesh of mice, and some of them are smaller and some larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you must turn the lips and cut open each of those hardnesses from all sides, and then when you have made an incision, fill the place with finely shredded wool until the blood is constricted, and then wash it with vinegar and treat the area with something astringent until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the incision of flesh attached to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	In many cases there appears on the gum flesh attached to which the ancients gave the name albulus; then you should suspend that part with a sponge or have in your hand a sponge and incise that area down to its base, and allow the pus to run out or the blood.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then apply to the wound powder that is astringent or excitative.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it again secondarily, and cauterize it, for after the cauterization it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the extraction of teeth with forceps.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth of both jaws and between the gums closely attached there are rough, sharp edges, lumps, and some areas are blackened and appear green or yellow, causing corruption to the gum and making the teeth lumpy.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore you should make the patient sit between your hands and place his head on your knees, and extract the teeth in which such rough edges appear and cause grittiness so that none of them remain, and this will remove the blackness and greenish discoloration and other issues so that they are cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If this can be done at the beginning of the extraction, that is good; but if not, then you should repeat the extraction on those teeth another day and on the second and third days until it reaches the final stage as you wish.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have need of various tools of different forms and shapes according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And because the razors are of the kind with which the tooth is cut from inside are different from those used to rasp between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare as you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the extraction of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	When you treat the tooth of its pain with all gentleness and delay in total extraction, for there is no remedy that can replace the root once it is extracted, since it is a substance sublime within which makes excuse for the extraction of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But when the necessity forces you to extract that tooth, you must firmly be certain which is the painful tooth, for often the pain deceives and leads one to believe it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one, but then the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, as we have already seen through the operations of surgeons.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, you must be certain which is the painful tooth. Once you know well, then it is necessary that you scarify around the tooth with spatula in which there is some virtue until it dissolves the tooth from the gum entirely, and then take it out using your fingers or with fine forceps little by little until it comes out.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then hold firmly with strong fingers for good traction or firm grasp, and place the head of the patient between your hands so that he is well held without discomfort, and then extract the tooth straight in such a way that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And so if it is not dislodged, then take one of those instruments and place it there from all sides with ease and exert effort to remove it just as it was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is loose or corroded, then you should wrap that part in cloth and secure it with a thin thread so that it does not break during your compression on that side holding it.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you should act carefully during the incision around all parts of the gum and guard with your strength that you do not break or damage it, and return to the problem for the sake of improving it so that it is better than the initial pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their hasty and daring attempts at extraction without administering what we have recommended; for many times this leads to serious conditions in patients, which are much harder to treat, and the roots of them become completely or partially destroyed, or you may extract it along with some bones of the mandible as many times has been testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And after the extraction of it, the mouth should be washed with cold water or warm salt water.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is bleeding due to this, as it often happens, then take some quantity of sugar and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that does not suffice, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and subtle holders with which the tooth is grasped at the beginning should be long in length, short in handle, and thick, so that they do not bend when you need to operate with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	Let them be such as you use for rough handling when straining them, that they may not be folded, but let their extremities be short.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	Let them be made of Indian iron, tapering towards the ends, and at the ends let there be teeth which enter into each other and strain by strong compression, and sometimes the ends of these should have the shape of a bird’s beak called ciconia, that is, a heron, and they should be very strong for constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the extraction of teeth and the removal of bones from broken jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you must perform the extraction of a tooth that is broken for some reason, it is necessary to wait and place something over the affected area for one or two days until the site becomes softened; then use tools with ends shaped like those of a bird’s beak called ciconia or heron, which resemble the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of these should be made like the teeth of a file or rasp.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if it does not obey when you try with these forceps or pincers, then you must probe around the root and remove all the flesh, and insert an instrument called atali, which is a small lever whose shape is as follows:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let it have a short thick end, and do not insert it too far so that it does not break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Then if the root is exposed by this method, it is good; and if not, assist with these other instruments of which the forms are as follows: the form of the first instrument is a triangular end in which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a very fine tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And here is how to use this instrument, which has two edges, whose form is as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which I will describe for scraping teeth; because this tool is made specifically for that purpose, and this is its form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the twisted or bent triangular end, which should have some thickness, and it should not be hidden such that it cannot be grasped.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another skill is to know the instruments for working on teeth, which are similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the skilled and subtle artisan finds for himself according to what he understands from the operation and various diseases; for there are diseases about which the ancients did not say or leave a proper instrument, due to the forms of different kinds.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth is grasped, or if you need to extract them, then place a proper cure upon it with what is suitable for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned for the extraction of tooth roots, and assist with the procedure whose form is as follows:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And it should have some thickness gradually increasing, and it should be tightly held in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all the bone is extracted; afterwards, restore the place with suitable medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small decay in the bone, then remove that which is decayed and its blackness, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of prominent teeth over other teeth.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the prominent teeth do not follow their natural course and especially when they affect women, and particularly those who are venerable; therefore, you should consider: if a tooth is too close to another tooth and it is impossible to file or apply any substance to it, then you must extract it. But if it is not attached to another tooth, at that time you incise it with this instrument whose shape resembles a pig's tusk, and it is made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp point.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And ensure your incision is such that when you incise it, over the course of several days due to the hardness of the tooth, it does not become connected to other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is a prominent tooth suitable for filing, then file it with an Indian iron file, which has this shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it be entirely made of Indian iron and grind it appropriately; it should have small pointed teeth like the file on which needles are made. With this, file the tooth little by little over several days with ease, so that it does not become connected to another tooth and cause harm.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And at the end, smooth it with a linen cloth, and polish it with razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth where part of it is broken and you touch the tongue, then you should file down the inside so that the roughness of that fragment is smoothed out and evened, and fill it in so that the tongue does not injure itself nor does speech become impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of defective teeth with gold or silver filling.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When it happens that the front teeth are damaged by impact or displacement due to an accident or fall, and the patient cannot bite properly as a result, and you have treated them with astringent medicines but your treatment has not been effective, then in order to prevent further damage, you should restore those strong teeth with gold and not silver, because silver can tarnish over time, whereas gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the filling should be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth; the method of the restoration is that you take the filling and place twice its amount between two healthy teeth, and then build up with twists of the filling material between one or more defective teeth until it reaches the adjacent healthy tooth.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then continue the restoration back to the part where you started, and ensure your work is done with ease and skill so that it is not defective.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And when you place the filling, ensure that your handling of the gold or silver does not damage the roots of the teeth.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then trim the excess filling material with forceps or scissors, and shape it carefully in each place. Convert and conceal these parts between the healthy tooth and the defective one so that they do not injure the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then file that area as smoothly as a Roman coin.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is loose or broken, repair that or those parts with additional filling material in such a way at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of two healthy teeth and of two crooked teeth, as you will see these diagrams:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it happens that I return one tooth or two near the placement of each in their places, and they grow back as we have recounted, and they become straight.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And only a good artisan and wise person can do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes a substitute is made from some cause of the bones of a cow, and it is shaped like a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is fixed as we have said, and remains and serves for that long.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the incision of the bandage which is applied to the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which is below the tongue sometimes is natural and one is born with it, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation is to open the mouth of the patient, his head being in this position; and raise his tongue, and then cut that ligament along its length as far as it separates the tongue from its base.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or knot in that area, and this is due to the healing of an injury, then you should cut through it along its length until you have severed the ligament and dissolved the knot.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to make a cut in the surface of the skin so that you do not sever the arteries and cause a flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	After washing the residue of the incision with water or vinegar or water and a cloth, place linen below the tongue; this is done so that the bad odor from under the tongue does not spread elsewhere.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If bleeding occurs, place over the area vitriol powder; but if the blood flows, then cauterize the spot with a hot iron, which is suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of a sublingual cyst.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, below the tongue, there appears a swelling resembling a small abscess that prevents the tongue from performing its normal function; and it often enlarges to the point of filling the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The procedure is to open the mouth wide in front of a light source and examine the swelling.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it as dark or black in color and hard, to which the swelling does not respond to touch, then do not attempt to treat it forcefully.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is inclined to a whitish color and appears moist, then you should proceed with the operation, cut it with a fine scalpel, and cut it completely; and if blood flows during your procedure, then place over it powdered zinc sulfate, which helps to stop the bleeding.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work once you have completed the procedure, washing it with vinegar and salt; and treat it with other remedies as needed until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter xxxvi.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of an abscess from both ears and of that which is near the cheekbone and of other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When I find in the cheekbone a collection of glands that are somewhat assembled and appear outside, which are called the ears, if you treat them as we have said in the division and they do not heal, then consider whether the abscess is hard, dark in color, and with little sensation; at this point, do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is red in color and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron because of the flow of blood; instead, let it remain inside until it is ripe, and then either you will extract it or it will rupture on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is white in color, soft, and the root is subtle, then that one should be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, whether the abscess has already begun to heal after being treated with rest or if it has diminished in any way; then make the patient sit facing the sun, and place his head to the side, and examine the mouth of the abscess, and the assistant takes between their fingers from below an instrument made of noble material, which has the following form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or iron, and should be as thin as a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	When you press with that instrument and the abscess is shown to you, place your finger carefully over it, then take some material and insert it into the opening, and pull it apart as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Other than that, if you wish to cut any cause of the tunics, and appropriately incise with the instrument which has this form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is similar to forceps, but the extremities of this one are curved, so that the opening of each of these is in line with the other, sharp, which is made of iron inside.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not at hand, then incise with a scalpel which has this form: It is sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have made one incision, make the other according to this method of cutting, and then the wound should be cleansed with water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is bleeding, cleanse it with water from the decoction of lemon peel or mint leaves and similar substances that are astringent until the flow of blood is stopped, and then proceed to treat it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes these appear in the groin or as abscesses near those two ears, and incise them according to what I have said about the incision of two cuts similarly.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I once treated a woman with an abscess that had appeared in her groin, which was dark in color and painful to the touch, causing it to close up the area of the groin, and she breathed through a narrow passage. She had been prohibited from eating or drinking water, and she would have been near death if I had not intervened within one day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had become so inflamed that it had formed two channels through which it discharged through two openings.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I cut it surgically and placed it in one of their vessels, and pulled that out, and from there the larger portion was removed, and then I incised that where I understood the other part to be joined, and then I closed its mouth, and compressed its tongue, and then I placed the vessel in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I removed a large part of it, and only a little blood flowed from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then the woman was completely cured, and she began to drink water immediately, and soon after she ate food. Therefore, I did not cease to incise that abscess many times over a long period, and another abscess succeeded in its place, which I incised as it became prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I applied something and cauterized the wound of it, then suddenly due to addiction; and after that I wandered around and did not know what God had done for me at that time.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the incision of the breast when it is abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When one observes catarr in the breast, and it is abscessed and long, it is then called perpendicular; and if it is thick and round in the lower part, it is then called a bubba.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is cured as we have described in the division, and your treatment does not conflict with that cure, and also sometimes there are abscesses that remain stubborn and subtle, then you should incise those that are aggregated and round. And if it extends to a certain length and is bloody, of dark or black color, and is not at the center, then you should attempt its incision because there is fear of malady in that case.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that according to the method which I have said about its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit and press the tongue with an instrument of which shows its form and immediately place the incision in the new area, and pull it down and incise it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two membranes.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And you must not incise it except as much as is naturally appropriate without addition, for if you incise too much, you will impair their speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And immediately after the incision, use what we have recommended for the incision of two membranes, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the incision, you should use something to cauterize it without causing fear, and the method of cauterization involves only sharp water. Place the head of the patient in your lap, then immediately press the tongue with the instrument which we have described, and subsequently take the water which we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it there as a living cautery, and place it neither thick nor thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument whose shape this is:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the extremity of the cautery on which the medicine is placed be like the concavity of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine over the ulcer, and the patient should lie on their side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth does not fall on it due to the intrinsic medicine, so that none of this falls onto it and causes harm.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then take the instrument with the medicine and apply it to the uvula for about a quarter of an hour until you see it become blackened and numbed due to the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take a piece of cotton and wrap it around the end of the reed, and dip the cotton in the medicine, and insert the reed with the cotton into a tube so that the cotton adheres to that tube, and do this as many times as necessary until you achieve what you want from cauterizing the grape, and then leave it there until it dries and falls off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and then after cauterizing, clean around the grape with cotton soaked in a bordering solution, and modify what is around it with that which is from the medicine, and wash it with water and soap, and treat it externally with an embrocation, and cure it internally according to the remedies until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this particular method of treatment is safer than incision and longer lasting in terms of avoiding fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	In some cases, the small grape is cured with something that cauterizes and incises more gently. It is treated by subfumigation in this manner: take wax, hyssop, thyme, rue, Arabian scammony, chamomile, and similar herbs; mix all of these or some of them in a vessel, and soak them in sour wine, then boil it. The mixture should be heated moderately, and at the bottom of the vessel place a tray, on top of which rests an instrument made of wire in this manner; it can be made of silver or wire.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And place the end in the mouth of the vessel so that the vapor reaches the uvula through the tube, until the uvula is sufficiently treated.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Then proceed with those incisions into where it is dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the onset of abscesses, for it would be too early for the abscess, and it is not appropriate for you to do that, but rather you should wait for the formation and maturation of the abscess.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If this instrument is not present at your disposal, now take a reed and attach to it a piece of horn at one end, so that the mouth of the wound is covered, for the piece of horn prevents the flame from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and of what adheres to the gums and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Incisions are made in what adheres to the gum or a fish bone or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you should extract what is apparent from that, which catches your eye, and after pressing the tongue with an instrument in front of light, so that it becomes clear to you what is in the gum.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what does not appear and is hidden in the gum, you should make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, for the cause attached to the gum will be easily expelled by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of bread or lettuce seed or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge and soak it firmly in vinegar, and then let the patient swallow that, as it reaches the place where thorns are, they will be easily expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Take one eel and boil it in honeyed vinegar, then remove its entrails and soak it; or take a rod and soak the medicine on it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If you do not forget the causes that we have mentioned, now use an instrument of lead in this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be as thick as a small reed, and at the end of it let there be a curve that you can insert into its throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And hold it with its head raised up, and be careful not to touch the bone of the throat, so that it does not injure the body or any part of the bones or spine, or cause harm to the patient.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But if the patient that inserts it is skilled, knowing the location of the cause attached and pulling with his hands on the instrument upwards, all this according to the quantity prepared within until it is removed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the Removal of a Leech Attached to the Throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the leech has been treated with what we have said in the division of treatment with medicines and compresses, consider now the throat of the patient in the sunlight, since you have retracted the tongue of the patient with the instrument that we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you see the leech, remove it gently with your fingers carefully.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to remove it, now take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's throat, and then place a heated iron on the concavity of the cannula, and do this several times (until the leech is dead and falls off), and have the patient abstain from water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Take a clean cloth soaked in water and wipe the mouth with it, then rinse the mouth with that water; do not swallow any of it for any reason and let the water remain in the mouth for about an hour one after another as soon as you feel the water cool.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If this is not possible according to what we have recommended, then fumigate the malodor with cyprus or asafoetida by means of the instrument which we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, and he will recover.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another method of operation in fumigation with that substance, which is to take an earthenware pot containing burning coals and cover it with a cover having a hole in the middle through which you attach the end of the instrument; then proceed with the fumigation from above; have him place his mouth at the end of the tube and close his mouth so that the smoke does not escape until you know that the fumigation has reached the bloodsucker, for it will fall immediately upon feeling the smoke.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not work, then repeat the fumigation as many times as necessary, and prevent the patient from drinking water, and give him salty and dry foods to eat, and let him not drink water. It is also necessary that this regimen be followed strictly.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which the bloodsucker is treated when it is seen in the throat; and it resembles forceps as you see them, but there is some curvature to it:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed in the throat, and the end of it resembles the beak of a heron, which is sharpened with a file, so that when it grips something, it does not let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In this chapter is the summary of the discourse on the preparation for the incision and treatment of abscesses.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are of various species and in many ways, as will be recalled for each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they differ in the incision and treatment of them by two methods, one of which is according to the nature of the abscess itself; and by what we learn from their humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is according to the parts of the body where they occur, for an abscess occurring in the head is different from one occurring in the buttocks; and an abscess occurring in fleshy parts is different from one occurring at a joint; and each has its treatment by surgical operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And there are some abscesses that should not be incised until they have reached proper maturity or completion.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	There are other abscesses that should be treated when they are crosswise and not fully mature according to their completion, such as those near joints, because an abscess near a joint prolongs the substance around it, corrupting the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of the limb; or if it is near a principal member, delaying its incision until it matures could harm the principal member; or if it is near the buttocks, you should not wait for full maturity before incising it to avoid the pus spreading into deeper parts of the buttocks and forming a fistula, or failing to heal properly.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	You should know the time for piercing the abscess, and this is when it is ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you should know that it is ripe when there is relief from the pain and the cessation of fever, and soon after the reduction in heat and pulse, and the sharpness at the head of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you should know that the piercing should be done at a place where pus is already present, below the abscess and from where pus will come for the healing of the elevation.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the piercing should always be done through the thickness of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the areas of the limbs or chest, and in places away from the joints, tendons, nerves, arteries; and finally, in any place where there is no reflection; for in those that reflect, use piercing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy area, the best time is to postpone the piercing until the digestion of the second stage is confirmed, as we have said; for if you pierce it before that, it prolongs the suffering of the patient and causes excessive putrefaction, and makes the lips of the wound hardened and its depth greater.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some abscesses should be pierced according to the thickness of the flesh or body due to necessity, or according to what that member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you should administer a small piercing in small abscesses, and in large abscesses, a larger and wider piercing or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And in other abscesses where it is necessary to incise and open them, when they are made as described, if done at a time when it is already suitable, just like those that occur with excessive boils and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those which are incised with a triangular section; and among these is one that is incised as the figure of a myrtle leaf, just like the abscesses of the angles.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those in which a round section and a lunar section are administered, and similar to these.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But in the case where there is none such as their superficial lion abscesses, you should puncture that with a shallow puncture, or just make it flat.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has collected pus, you should puncture it but do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted part of it, on another day scrape the abscess inside, and then extract a larger portion, and continue doing this multiple times according to its severity until it heals.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is a malnourished adult, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an elderly person in debility, for their vital spirit is quickly resolved with the evacuation of the pus, and the patient may die easily, so you must operate carefully.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter and the puncture you perform on these abscesses; clean the plaques and then consider whether the plaque of the abscess is small or if it is a flat section, in which case you should apply some of it or attach it to antiseptic cotton; and if the abscess is large and the cracks of the puncture are many, then you should place wax on each part until they heal.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the cord is divided or you have concaved it around the circumference, then you should cover it with old cloth or thread made from linen, as when you treat pustules or boils without moisture; and strengthen that on the third day; and thereafter proceed with it and care for it according to what is needed of ointments until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If blood flows during the time of your operation, then at that hour administer water mixed with vinegar in which you dip a cloth, and place that over the site of the bleeding for several applications.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the bleeding continues, then you should administer treatment and cure with powders that I have recommended in various places of this our book and in its division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is in the time of winter, and the site of the abscess is a place with many nerves, then you should apply powders mixed with vinegar and heated oil, and place those on the sites.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the sites are fleshy, then you should apply powders mixed with water and oil or with vinegar and oil, and let all of this be applied for no more than three days, as we have said. Then you should open the abscess, cleanse it, and administer whatever is necessary for its cure until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary to know about the treatment of abscesses generally, but according to the method of distinction I have already described for each type of abscess in a particular manner.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On the sectioning of abscesses that occur in the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the neck, small abscesses may occur, along with various types of nodes that contain membranes; and these types vary in many ways.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they are soft, and those that contain moisture similar to jelly.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	Of those which contain humidity similar to dust, and resembling them; and of those that are stony, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as the extraction of those does not oppose surgery.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you should use an instrument whose form approaches this, which is called an entroba, so that you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what it contains is humidity, then you should cut that with a section according to its length for a superficial section according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin in the section of the line B to the line G. When the humidity is evacuated, then you should remove that skin which contains that humidity, and do not leave any cause for inflammation, as overly observed return if anything remains from that cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse the piece in Egyptian ointment, if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and apply that to the wound and leave it for another day, as with this you will dissolve everything that remains of that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then repeat on that piece with the Egyptian ointment a second and third time if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin; now treat the wound with an ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if an abscess contains hard lumps, then you should incise that according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a section having the shape of a cross, and grasp once between two lips of the section and scrape it thoroughly from all sides, and exert your skill in extracting the membrane that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If there is opposition from you regarding archery, now do what I have recounted to you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, treat the suppurated boil with respect to its section and cure as we have told you; and the section of a suppurated boil is easier, because it has little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes there are some of these boils that occur on the head in some people who do not have much moisture throughout; the cause is that I once incised a boil on an old woman's head and found it as hard as a stone, rough, white, which could not be scraped off, and if anyone were to strike it, it would hurt them.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other boils that occur on the head, this is not the case with this chapter; similarly, for the boils that appear on children's heads and behind their ears, the section of all these should be superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And avoid piercing those in the lower part so that the contents of the boil can drain into the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And treat those as is appropriate for their healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the incision of scrofulas that occur on the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These boils often appear on the neck, in the armpits, and in the groin areas; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And for those that occur on the neck, and often they are generated between them, and every scrofula among them is within its own proper layer, just as in the nodes and boils of the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	There are species of these scrofulas that are movable, for only some of them are lithic, and of those only the ones containing humidity, and of those only the malignant ones which do not obey cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that one which you find to be well disposed upon examination, of which the color of what is manifest is proper to the color of the scrofula, and it is localized to an entire part, and it is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and it is not hard, you should incise that one superficially on the side above the side below the body at the line of .G. within the line of .B., and scrape that one from all sides, and extend two lips of the scrofula an inch, or inches if there is a need for them, as we have said regarding abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is safer that the vein or nerve not be incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatum not be sharp, so that it does not cause you to make an incision unnecessarily, or disturb the patient, and do not incise what is not necessary to incise; for if you should cut a vein or artery during your operation, then apply green vitriol powder or other powders which promote blood flow, and staunch the wound, and leave that inside where the inflammation subsides and let the swelling be mollified and begin to soften.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood has clotted.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation once you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire at the time of the operation if there is any cause for the other small scrofulas, and then incise those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if there is a large vein in the region of the scrofula, avoid cutting into that scrofula in its vicinity.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	And be careful to tie very tightly a ligature above it and let the diseased part fall off by itself without harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old lint that you have already soaked in Egyptian soap, and then treat it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut into the entire scrofula, then make sure to bring the two lips of the wound together and sew them up immediately so that there is no room for any superfluous material.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is excess material due to the size of the scrofula, then you should understand that you need to cut into its root, remove it, and apply sutures as described.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those scrofulas that contain moisture, make a superficial puncture where the site of maturation appears to you, and do not pierce deeper into what would reach the pus at the bottom of the abscess, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then proceed with the puncture, and apply applications and remedies appropriate for such cases, so that it dissolves what remains from the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see that the wound is already clean, then treat it with a healing poultice until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the division of the pustule of an accidental abscess in the groin.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	Thus did the ancients call this section in the epitome, and no one has seen such an incision made in our land.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those people.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In men with a tendency to hemorrhage, it is advisable to avoid the extraction of the epilhot, as this cannot be done safely because all the veins and major vessels are located here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have boils or abscesses in the mouth, throat, or ears, when the illness is not in the bone, it is advisable to use the section of the epilhot to avoid the loss which is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do this, cut the epilhot below three circles of its circles, or four if it is a small section across where it lies between two circles in quantity. The section should be made in the bone, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for cutting because it lacks flesh and the blood vessels are thin there.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the surgeon is cautious, it is advisable to first extend the tissue of the throat for an inch and then make a cut until he reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any reason to do so.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut the bone as we have recommended; this is significant regarding the section of the canal by the membrane which is of that essence and by the division of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Thus when the hour is delayed in which the perforation is feared, add two lips of the seam of the wound, and cut that one alone away from the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Al-Bucasis says that the essence of what we have discussed is to see that some of these abscesses have already blocked the airway of the patient, and the patient has come close to death, and the part of it is cut off, and some would incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the site of the wound by some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this reason, it is commanded to leave the wound open until the malignity of the disease is consumed; and the malignity lasts for three days; therefore, during these hours, it is commanded to keep the wound open, and treat it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen myself is that a servant took a knife and cut into her own airway and incised part of the cartilage of the trachea, and I was called to treat her, and I heard the moaning as if it were the groan of the dying, and uncovered the wound and saw the blood that had flowed from the wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Thus I confessed that she had not cut any vein or artery, and the air was coming out of the wound, and I treated her until she was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And the servant did not suffer any harm except that her voice became hoarse, and after some days she returned to improvement in her condition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Here I say that in the section of the episiotomy there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the section on abscess which occurs in the groin outside, and is called hernia of the groin.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess called hernia of the groin is large according to the person's complexion, and it occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it happens in two ways, for it is either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, there is no need for treatment.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one happens in two ways, one of which resembles fatty knots, and the other way resembles an abscess caused by the constriction of an artery, and in that case there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it does not do to make an incision with iron except in the one that is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should avoid that and investigate it as mentioned, and if you find it resembling fatty knots and not attached to any veins, then incise it as you would with knots, and extract it using water or whatever contains oil and bursericlam; and if not, then thoroughly examine its nature, and afterwards treat the area with what is needed for healing until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the section on the kinds of knots.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	There are various kinds of knots, and I have already mentioned all their kinds in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And so I recommend that you distinguish between a knot and an ulcer as this causes doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, I say that an ulcer is characterized by heat and fever and intense pain inside it, where the bubbling of excess matter subsides; it is completed by putrefaction, which at this point stops the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But a knot is neither hot nor feverish nor painful, and it resembles the swelling behind the ear which is in its own place.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it depends on the color of the skin, and its beginning is like a pimple, and it develops in such a way, whether larger or smaller, and there are two kinds of them: dry ones that contain little moisture, and moist ones whose colors indicate humidity, as I describe in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you reach the treatment of a knot, express it and investigate its origin at the beginning, which is called an intramuscular boil, as its form will be described in the chapter that follows this one.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And the method of investigation for abscesses and all knots is to take this swelling and introduce it into the most humid part of the area you find in the abscess, and you will gently move it until you know that the swelling has penetrated the tissue.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And subsequently, according to the size of the abscess, remove the introduced swelling and observe what has remained in its place.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the moisture is found to be flowing out, regardless of its color, then you should incise it with a superficial cut as I have described for other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture from the penetration, then you know that it is greasy.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And if it is dry and has the shape of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As you have been taught, suspend that part and scrape the wound from all sides with ease, and keep the skin or sack if possible over it and extract that pus at the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is torn during the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and you should leave it as it is; then you will extract it gradually so that none of it remains for any reason.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if any of it remains for any reason, whether little or much, the node will return accordingly.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that any part of it remains, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders and clean the wound, and place over it something that will draw out the abscess cauterized, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the node is large, then you should cut both sides of it and treat it with what promotes healing.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if a pulsating or non-pulsating vein is involved, then you should tie it off and fill the area with vitriol three times so that the wound heals and the boiling of the blood subsides; and after two or three days return to incising what remains of the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of the instruments necessary for surgery and puncture.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of these there are forms of the probes, and they come in three kinds, which are large among those, and medium-sized from them, and small from them.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large probe is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium-sized probe is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small probe is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They should be made of iron, of aluminum, with carefully rounded ends, so that they may be easily inserted into abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the forceps, and they are called albaraz, and one of them is called berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And they come in three kinds, which are large, medium, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large forceps is as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the medium-sized forceps is as follows:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small forceps is as follows:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	They should be used for abscesses, excretions, fistulas, and buboes, as they are effective between the bones and for other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they should be made round, thick, and sharp, like large needles with which the sutures are sewn. They are made of citron wood, or horn, or iron, or silver, and the best ones are when they are made of citron wood.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the forceps are made with a black feather, which allows them to be used to extract fistula reflections that are present within them, as they can be gently guided by their lightness along those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And there are three types, some of which are long, and others medium, and the rest short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the constriction of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the great expert of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the medium expert of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small expert of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the hooks are of one type, some of which are simple, having only one curve, and they are of three types: large, few, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And their hooks are round, and they are of three types.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those, their hooks have two curves, and they are of three types.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those, their hooks have three curves, and they are of three types.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of a large simple hook, form as follows:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a medium simple hook:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small simple hook, form as follows:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a large round hook:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a medium round hook, form as follows:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small round hook, form as follows:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a large hook having two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of a medium-sized hook having two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a small hook having two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a large hook having three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a medium-sized hook having three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a small hook having three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the knives with which nodes and abscesses are cut and pared, and they are of three kinds: one is large, one medium-sized, and one small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Shape of a large knife:
Forma del scapel migier:	Shape of the medium-sized knife:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Shape of the small knife:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those with which section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not blunt, but designed in such a way that during the paring of nodes there is no fear of cutting a vein or nerve. This allows the patient to be healed and find some tranquility due to the adjustment that occurs after the excision of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of forceps, and they are of three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The shape of the large forceps:
Forma de magda migier:	Shape of the medium-sized forceps:
Forma de magda pauc:	Shape of the small forceps:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	Let there be a piece of cloth and its likeness as rays are made by which alcohol is prepared.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the outer part marked with a point hidden by a spoon and in that curve keep the parts inside and outside as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The shapes of the spoons, which are hidden among the said leaves for the incision of abscesses and I do not perceive the maladies, and there are three kinds of them: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the shapes of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The shapes of cupping instruments with which the blood flow is cut off, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; the shapes are as follows:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	Let them be made of citrus rind, round with some length, and let them be thin.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And you should have these kinds of cupping instruments: large, medium, and small, so that with them you can cut off the blood flow quickly when needed, and at times when there is no other immediate treatment.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to cut off blood from every part of the body, and use them only on fleshy areas such as the joints of the arms and legs, and the joints of the shoulders, and the breasts and abdomen and thighs, and similarly on other fleshy joints.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes these instruments are made of other small tools resembling fish scales in this form; with which the blood is cut off when it is done by phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	For some incisions they are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of men's nipples which are similar to those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some incisions should be made in the nipples of certain men when they begin to itch due to swelling, and subsequently the nipples become swollen and resemble those of women, and we should apply plasters.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for that which you desire to perform, cut those as in a crescent shape according to this form, from the line B into the line G, and subsequently scrape off all roughness, and then fill the wound with flesh-generating medicine, and subsequently sew together the two lips of the wound, and take care until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the nipple inclines to the sides and is softened due to its size similarly as in women, then it should be cut into two parts with excess flesh removed, each in crescent sections like this figure, each part contained within the other such that one line encompasses the other according to this form from the line B and the line G. And subsequently scrape off the unevenness between the two lips of the wound, remove the fat, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders as necessary until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the discomfort of the patient and the flow of blood, then you should fill the wound with cotton submerged in corrosive liquid and let it remain until that which is rotten from the fat is corroded, and subsequently take care of it until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the Incision of Abscesses that Appear in the Throat.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that appear in the throat are among the types of scrofulous nodules, which are hard and covered with a skin that can be lifted.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	Of these, only some contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised in a crescent shape as shown in this figure: from the line G to the line B. And once all the pus inside the abscess has been evacuated, you then fill it with wool and leave it for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And afterward the wound should be treated with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the type of nodes or scrofulous nodules, then you should proceed to incise it as we have described in the section on scrofulous nodules.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the infection has spread to the surrounding area, then apply cautery as we have previously described.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the Incision of Abscesses that Occur Due to Artery or Vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured and the wound around it has healed, an abscess may occur. The signs by which one can determine whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: when the abscess is due to an artery, it tends to be elongated near the front of the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you will hear a hissing sound in that area.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is from a vein is round on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And a section on this abscess is an error, especially in those areas near the armpits, and in the angles, and in the neck, and in many places on the body; for it is dangerous, therefore it should be avoided, and those that are in the extremities or on the head should also be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	For that which is due to inflammation of the artery opening, divide in the long section carefully; and near make the incision with hooks and near the artery, and remove the tunics until it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place on that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread at two places, which I warn you about in the extraction of two arteries, which usually occur in the thighs.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then press the place which is between two ligaments with a probe until the blood stops there, and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer treatment in which pus is generated so that the ligaments fall off; and then treat it with appropriate remedies so that it may be healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess due to the section of a vein, then you should have in your hand what is possible regarding the abscess with caution, and then insert the needle below the place where you had your hand, and make it penetrate; and tie it with double thread so that you can extract it from the other side, and then ligate the abscess with a good ligature as I have told you about in the grapevine ligature on both sides of the thread's ends.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that you will extract the thread, then insert a needle under the abscess below the point of incision; and place your fingers in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Approach the abscess in its middle part when it is empty of what was inside; then incise the surface of the membrane, and leave what is attached to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then press on the powder which you have mixed with wine and oil, and subsequently administer the treatment made with hot cloths and herbs until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter on the abscess that occurs due to nerve twisting.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Just as an abscess can occur in arteries and veins, similarly, an abscess can occur in nerves when they are subjected to percussion or overexertion, and by analogy.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is done for it by the hands of assistants or at the heel, or in any place where the joints are usually troubled.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the surrounding tissue, and it is in one of its major positions when it is tight with fever, and the patient appears dazed.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess that aggregates at the front of the body, and therefore it is below the membrane, and it affects all parts equally and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, when it is in the joints, there is no need to wrap it in cloth, for it will easily lead to contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	Make a cut in the head or forehead with a spatum (a type of surgical knife).
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it is a small abscess, open it with forceps and drain it completely.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend it with incisions, and excise that part; and close the wound with sutures, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter XI.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the incision of an abscess that occurs on the lip as it would occur on the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Therefore, some people are afflicted in their abdomens and other parts of their bodies, which are called fungous because they resemble mushrooms, whose cause is subtle but the manifestation is large; and often the edges of these are reddened, and it can be small or may become greatly enlarged.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one case where there were two parts in his abdomen that resembled mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white parts with their fine cause.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the edges of those parts were inverted and they would split open, and moisture constantly flowed from them.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, I incised them and found inside one weighing about eighteen ounces and the other about six ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the procedure during the incision of such abscesses is that you should consider whether the malady is humid, and if the color of the abscess is white and humid, with a fine cause; then you incise it with a broad spatum, and in your presence cauterize it over fire, because in such cases the section must expel much blood; and if the blood flows out, cauterize that area.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the wound is small and fearsome, guard against probing with iron; instead, take fresh lead and apply it to that part in the manner we have described; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust it in the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not stop applying more lead until it is detached and falls off by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the wound is of thick tissue, then in probing it there is some cause for fear and dread, especially in those that are in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you can probe half of it, and then cauterize that part so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then treat it until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful that you do not attempt to probe a wound that is dark in color, has little sensation, and appears bad, for such a wound is likely cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And here I will recall something regarding this matter.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LII.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the Treatment of Hernias of the Navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	A hernia of the navel is caused by various reasons; it may be due to fissures in the abdominal wall above the belly, and in such cases, membranes or intestines protrude as they do in other ruptures; or it may be due to a wound from which blood flows from a vein or artery depending on the situation, or it may be caused by trapped air.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to a fissure in the abdominal wall and the protrusion of membranes, then the color of the swelling is similar to the color of the body; it does not cause much pain, and can appear in various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is by exit from the bowel, then at that moment the situation of that thing which we have recounted differs greatly in degree, and when you press that thing with your fingers, it hides and returns; and quickly it is there, and it is magnified much by the introduction of bath and hard work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	And if due to moisture, then it is soft and does not hide when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it hard.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then at that moment these signs appear with the abscess turning to a declining blackness.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	And if it is due to flesh lacking moisture, then the abscess is severe, large and hard, and it penetrates in quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	And if it is due to gas, then the touch of it is soft.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in this case is that you consider at this moment whether the prominence of the navel is due to blood from an artery, or from a vein, or due to gas; now it behooves you to be cautious about treating it, for there is fear and dread as I have taught you in the chapter where I have said about abscesses from arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the bowel or the membrane, then it behooves you to order the patient to have their belly empty and be standing extended; then examine around the entire circumference of the navel with your hand; then order them to stand facing between your hands on their belly; then encircle the area with a strip of linen about an inch wide around the circumference of the navel over the spot you marked with your finger; then extend half of the abscess above toward both sides with a thick bandage or a cloth and tie it securely.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	From the side of the swelling of the abscess spread over the bandage and insert your finger into that pus and search for the bag; and if you have found it or secured it by the bandage, now extract it immediately and urge the bag to the parts inside the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the cloth, now take it with force; and cut into the excesses of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your art or vein, now surround that spot, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and place them in those two strong places and insert two needles into the circuit you made around the abscess in a cross manner, which you should make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area so that the extended flesh can drain and fall off by itself; or incise it when it is thin and let it drain, and then treat it with water as needed until it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the swelling of the navel is of flesh or due to moisture, now it is necessary for you to conquer the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or moisture that you find there, and then treat it with water as needed and to consolidate the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of ulcers.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said in the division about the types of ulcers and in what manner they are to be treated with medicines, and that it is necessary for the treatment to avoid ulceration; we have also discussed how ulcers arise and the care and caution required for their treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients would say that sometimes crabs [tumors] are in places where it is possible to eradicate them, just as with the crab that is in the breasts or in the groin and similar parts assigned to remove all of it, especially when it begins small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and hard, do not try to deal with it yourself, for I cannot heal any such case nor have I seen another succeed, nor has anyone else reached that point.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is when it is necessary, as we have said, that you precede and let the patient rest and purge from black bile for several days, and then drain that area if there is obvious swelling.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for the procedure in which the operation is to take place, and afterwards apply hooked instruments that are needed for it; and then clean thoroughly with a good bandage to ensure proper healing so that there remains no cause for recurrence.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not apply abscesses too quickly, and press the areas, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is suitable among those available to you.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if it is contrary to let the thick blood flow and you must incise a vein or artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood stops, and afterwards treat it with other methods until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 46.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the Treatment of Hydrophobia.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already described in the division the types of hydrophobia caused by water, and the symptoms of each type, as well as the treatment for them with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	From that which is treated with iron, there is only the specialty of wound treatment, and it is not approached with iron to the specialty of drummers nor to the specialty of underarchs, for this is lethal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this specialty of tympanitic hydrops with medicines and do not confirm your treatment, now consider whether the sick person has become debilitated or is suffering from another illness of hydrops, just as if it were coughs or other chest or stomach ailments similar to those. Now be cautious that you do not treat them with iron, for there is fear concerning this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the sick person with abundant vitality, and in them there is no other illness but hydrops alone, and neither a child nor an elderly person, then the method of the operation on them is that you lift the sick person between your hands, and the minister presses their belly with his hand, expelling the water below the navel, and then take spatum spinos in this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	it should be of two sharp points long, with a sharp end like spatum; but there should be some small gradual narrowing in it, so that during the operation you do not penetrate into the bowel, and thus harm them.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the origin of the hydrops is from the bowels, for then it is necessary that in your incision you distance yourself from the navel by the amount of three fingers below, on the right side over the navel.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the origin of the hydrops is from a kidney illness, then your incision should be to the left of the navel by three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is from the gall, then your incision must be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side where the patient wants to lie because the superfluities would run to that place and foul it.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce with the instrument all along the wound, and then insert into that incision, and raise your hand between the wound and the siphon, and you should excise that; and if the quantity is of one almond or so.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the siphon so that pus can reach the empty space, which is where the water will be.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument which has the following form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it resembles a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or ivory or lion's leather, at the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on both sides three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the end of it is cut like a feather, as you see.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the upper end of it is a ring, because when the instrument reaches the fluid, then immediately press on the instrument, so that you evacuate only a moderate amount of fluid at once, for if you remove too much in one go, it can quickly lead to the patient's death due to resolution of their vital spirit, or it may hasten the approach of death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate that in accordance with the strength of the patient and as indicated by the condition of the patient, the quality of their pulse, and their overall well-being.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Here is the translation:
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And after that, take the instrument to the other side if the patient tolerates it thus, and extract a small quantity from the water, and do this for some days out of fear, and guard yourself against error so that you do not run out of the water before its time.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear for the patient, and allow a large quantity of water to be extracted, then bury him in fine sand, and sprinkle moisture over him in baths, and let him remain in the sun for long periods; and treat him with drying medicines until he is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize the stomach and the intestines after the extraction of the water, as I have recounted regarding what should be done previously.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 55.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children who are born with unopened passages for urine.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes a child is born from the mother's womb with the head of its mixture not pierced (or it is twisted tightly or is not in its proper place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, you should attempt to pierce it as soon as the child is born using a fine instrument according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then insert a fine lead needle into the obstruction and leave it there for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he needs to urinate, remove it and let him urinate; then return it afterwards.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not insert the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over that area will not allow this needle to stay.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	May that part where the wound is tight be treated with a lead nail, as we have said, for enough days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	May those in which the wound is not in its place be treated as mentioned, the cause of which is that he was born with the urethra at the end of the penis shaft, so that he cannot urinate properly; and it is not for generation, because thus the semen cannot reach the main channel, and this is a laghid disease.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the method of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, and then with your left hand you extend the head of the penis forcefully, and cut off the head of the penis at the location of the foreskin with a sharp scalpel, as one would cut a feather or shave some part, so that the middle part of it resembles the head of the penis and that the wound falls in its proper place as needed.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful during your operation to stop bleeding, as this often happens; and pause the procedure until you have stopped the bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the inflammation that occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and of corruption, blackening, and adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	This inflammation often occurs in the penis and is a soft tissue prominence.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of these is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	For benign cases, suspend one ounce of the subtle substance and cut off that which holds the entire mole; then place upon it a poultice made with Egyptian myrrh; and afterwards treat it with a cleansing agent until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the mole is malignant and of a dark color, then you should administer cauterization at the base of it and around its ratio (proportion).
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the mole is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one part of the mole is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then you should remove the part that is inside as soon as it begins to heal; and afterwards treat the part that is outside, because when treating both at once with the foreskin, there is no assurance that it will not be injured.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if similar conditions occur in the genitalia and on the foreskin, such as blackening and corruption, then you should excise everything that is already discolored and what is about to become corrupted or what is already corrupt; and afterwards apply a dressing over it with honey, which has been crushed with ground wheat bran and finely sifted.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And afterwards treat it with other methods until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is bleeding, then administer lunar cauterization according to this method:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because cauterization is beneficial in two situations together: for bleeding and when the wound becomes corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed, then you should insert a lead tube into the urethra so that the urine can pass through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in one whose foreskin is his, and upon whom circumcision is not required; and when adherence occurs due to a plague or an abscess) it should be that you scrape with a blunt spatula so that the bond may dissolve and the head of the penis may be released entirely.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to distinguish them carefully, then you should scrape with a spatula some part of the head of the penis and the foreskin, and this is because when the foreskin is fine, due to its fineness it can be easily perforated by its subtlety.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a fine thread, which is moistened in water, so that they do not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then treat with styptic juice so that it may be healed and consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the cleansing of children and the treatment of what occurs during circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution like the continuity of other plagues; however, since it is part of our practice and our will, and since it properly applies to children, it is necessary that we assign the best procedure and the easiest path leading to health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they do not use it in their laws, and this is only because we have acquired it through experience. The reason I have found is that most surgeons and barbers use a razor and scissors for circumcision and cleansing; and they use thread made of sinew and incision with the fingernail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	Thus have I described all these methods and found no better modification with scissors, thread, or nail in the modification as with the nail, since most times you avoid the cicatrix above, because the cicatrix of the foreskin has two tunics, and remove the tunic below, and it is necessary for another incision and certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in the modification which is done by alphabetic means, and is digital, which surgeons use, the incision of the extremity of the male member is not secured, since it easily enters into the groove.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with a nail, you may easily err and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the cicatrix of a child is short by nature, and most often they are born in such a way that there is no need for modification, and I have seen that.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But concerning the modification that is done with scissors and thread with a needle, the goodness and experience reveals to me, since the scissors are of proportional incision, by which the sharpness above is as the sharpness below; and thus when you press your hand proportionally on both sharpnesses, and make an incision according to a comparison at once; and it is made compression of the needle in the figure containing the cicatrix of the penis all around, with which you catch no error at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the method of the first operation is that you make the child lie down if it is one of those whom I consider a small one, and that you bind the needle to his penis only, and leave that for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make him cheerful in every way that is possible to you from what he can understand.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Let him stand between your legs preparedly, and let it not be seen by anyone else; and hide the scissors in your hand or leave them tied up, so that the child does not see them or any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Then insert your hand into the penis and blow into the urethra, and pull it in so that the head of the penis is retracted, and then clean what is attached there from filth.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then mark the place with fire twice, and then ligature the lower part of that with a small second ligature, and then tie the place of the ligature well below with good retention, and incise between the two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then raise the urethra gently and extract the head of the penis; then let the blood flow slowly, for it is better; and sprinkle powder over it, and on top of the powder place a cloth dipped in vinegar from a hen that has been kept with rose oil recently prepared well; and leave it like that until the other day; and treat it with care until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the scissors used for cleaning is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let one set of blades be unsharpened and the other sharpened, so that the tip of the blade does not come out, and let the length of both sharp edges be equal to the length of two fingers equally.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in cleaning is that you may forcefully evade the intrinsic urethra entirely or part of it during the incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you should extend that from your hour to your nail in front of the abscessed area and incise it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, now extract it with a lancet and incise it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	And if three days have passed and the swelling remains below the testicle as an abscess, now you should lay open what is inside until the abscess discharges, and clean that which has been laid open, and incise that according to your preparation.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the head of the testicle, for it should not suffer from this.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And thus cure that which is open with the plasters made from the powders we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised too much from the cord, and you follow the instructions above, this will not harm it.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that which is open as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or blood clots, or pus or flesh, and similar conditions as those we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine does not dissolve, and retention occurs because of a stone that is in the neck of the bladder, now it is necessary for the patient to bend over onto their knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place the feet of that person on their knees and extend their belly from the part above their buttocks, and have the patient strain their breath as much as is possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, when the neck of the bladder is constricted for the expulsion of the stone to the rear parts, urine is passed.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved by the water that we have mentioned and the forceful cause of the ailment is established, then it is necessary to administer extraction with an instrument called a siringua, which has the following form: It should be made of silver and be as thin as a reed quill, like a canula from a bird's feather with fineness and length similar to half a palm, at its end there should be a thin tube.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of testing the urine with it is that you take a thread and tie one end to the extremity of the wool or cloth for a good binding; and insert the ends of the thread into the lower part of the siringua, and cut off any excess wool with scissors if necessary. Then insert it into the tube with force and withdraw the siringua gently.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And treat the ailment above the pubic region, and inject the bladder with a tube anointed with oil, olive oil, and aqua regia.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the siringua with ease until it reaches the end of the tube; and then bend the tube above the part where it will be inserted; and then push the siringua inside that; and then push that into the bladder until the ailment is reached, and if this is not done in this order, but rather in the one that goes to a tortuous path.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then pull the thread with the cloth little by little, for the urine will wet the cloth.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Here is the English translation:
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of enemas for the bladder, with the use of an enema bag and similar instruments, which are appropriate for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When ulcers or abscesses occur in the bladder, or when there is clotted blood or obstructed pus, and you wish to administer water and medicines into it, then an instrument called clampcedra should be used, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but at the tip of it, it is blunt, so that it may be closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that part there are three parts: two on one side, as you can see.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning, it is concave, where what is to be introduced is placed, and it should be according to the quantity that needs to be expelled, without addition, until when any cause draws out the moisture, it can be drawn out, and when it is expelled, with this as well, and when it is expelled far, as the clampcedra does which has naphtha attached for naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to extract moisture from the bladder, insert the tip of the clampcedra into the moisture, and draw out with it the water that is introduced into the side parts, for the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the tip of the clampcedra into the tube as we have recommended in the circular part; and then introduce the moisture with what you are introducing, for that moisture will reach the bladder immediately, along with the treatment.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the instrument with which the bladder is treated is subtle, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or of lead, with its head being similar to a small feather, and below the thread is drawn.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take a bladder of an animal, and place in it the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and then tie it up between two strong ligatures made of fine thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the end of the crystal into the arm.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then press your hand on the bladder with the humidity until it is well distributed inside so that the patient feels that the humidity has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if a bladder is not available to you, then take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle; and perforate it all around its circumference; and then insert strong thread into those holes, both ways; and then attach the circle as it should be attached, so that you place in it what you want from humidities, oils, and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then tie it to the instrument and do with it as you did with the bladder, and press your hand so that the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the Extraction of Stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already mentioned in the division the kinds of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, as well as the signs of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have described the stone in which the operation is performed and its section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And he who wishes to narrate it will do so with that clear exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, I say that the stone generated in the bladder mainly affects children; and of its signs is that the urine which is expelled from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, but there appears a kind of sand; and the patient scratches his genitals, and has frequent urges to urinate, and soon becomes erect; and with these words you will find the cause.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is easy to cure the children before they reach fourteen years of age; and it is a difficult treatment for older individuals.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in young people it is moderate compared to those extremes.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And for the one in whom the stone is larger, the cure is longer; and if it is small, the opposite is true.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, to reach the cure for that condition, we begin by cleansing the patient with a diet that excludes all foods which prevent the dissolution of the stone due to their nature.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then let the patient lie on his back and be placed in a position that causes the stone to descend to the neck of the bladder, or move from its place, by various means.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make the patient lie between his thighs, well prepared, and place him with his legs apart, so that the bladder is made to slope towards the sides.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And thus he probes that and all around it.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel the stone in the space, now you should cut it immediately with a section of it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not catch it right away with your touch, now it is necessary for you to anoint with oil your index finger of the left hand, if female, or the middle finger if male, and insert that into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And probe for the stone until it is within reach of your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gently guide it little by little into the bladder neck.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on that with your finger, and expel it outwards towards the place where the section was made.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand; and command another assistant to spread the thighs outward with one hand, and with the other hand pull back the skin that is in front of the thighs, at the place where the section is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a probe that has this shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and cut in there what is between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle, but towards the left side; and make the incision over that stone with your finger in the anus, and make a transverse section so that the external part of the incision is wide and the internal part narrow according to how much you can extract from the stone, but no more, because it is easier for your finger to compress the stone outside the incision without difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that some stones have angles and edges, because of which it is difficult to polish them smoothly.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And this one resembles a lion's paw in shape, it is round, and it is made of a stone that can be polished easily.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Then adjust it in the fissure where there are angles and edges.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not inserted properly, now cover it over that area, or attach something over it decently, the end of which should be like a file with which you stroke over the stone, and do not move away from it; or insert an intricate curved instrument beneath it.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot do that, then slightly enlarge the wound, and if you see blood flowing, cauterize it with a vinegar solution of nitre.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if there is more than one stone, at the beginning you press your hand to the bladder's mouth, and then cut around it; and then slightly move it away from there; and similarly proceed if they are in groups of more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, it is unwise to cut it into large pieces, because this may cause one of two harmful outcomes: either death or that it leads to continuous urine leakage, since the area might not heal completely.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer an expulsion to remove it entirely, or devise a fracture of it with forceps to extract it in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then when you have completed your operation, now fill the wound with pieces of aloes and dragon's blood, and cauterize it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And pause over that cloth infused in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water mixture, so that the abscess may yield.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And apply the poultice to the affected area on the side of the neck, and do not loosen the bandage within the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that area is unbandaged, wash the place with water and a little oil, and apply care to it with chamomile ointment and with balm ointment until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound an abscess should occur that is hard and corrosive, and of such appearance as if the blood is frozen in a bladder, and because of this urination is prevented (and this is known by the mixture of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it will cause corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with sour wine, water and salt, and apply whatever is appropriate to it for healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And it is necessary throughout the entire treatment that you change both the dressings and adjust the medicines which are applied to the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the urethra, and is stuck there, and urination is prevented, then treat it with what I recommend before resorting to section, because many have been accused of unnecessarily proceeding to section due to this treatment; and indeed, I suggest this, which is that you take a blunt iron probe, which has the following shape:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a triangular tip, sharp, attached to a handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Take some wax, and tie it to the thread below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Approach and insert the needle into the thread, piercing with ease until it reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the needle with your hand on that small stone little by little, and you will pierce it through so that one end can penetrate as the other enters; for the urine will immediately be released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on what is broken from the stone that has come out beyond the thread, for this part is cracked and will pass with the urine, and thus the illness will be cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some reason that prevents it, then tie a piece of wax below the stone and another piece above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then cut into the stone on that thread between the two ties.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then untie the ligature and clean the collected blood, which has formed around the stone.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to tie wax below the stone except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other ligature above it, because when the wax near the swelling of the stone is untied, the cord will return to its place and reform the swelling.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason, when you tie the wax above, you need to lift the cord to the upper parts, or return it to its proper position, so that the swelling reforms as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the Extraction of Stones from Women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If a stone is found in any of them, the treatment is difficult at that time and is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of these is that the woman must be strong and light.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you often do not find a woman who will honestly reveal whether she has had sexual intercourse when chaste, or whether she is one of those women who have husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you often do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation without a man.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location for the incision to reach a stone in women is far from the location of the stone, which requires a deeper incision, and there is danger in this.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity compels you to do this, then it is necessary for you to take a skilled female assistant, and such are rarely found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you lack such an assistant, then seek a wise and subtle woman, or present a midwife who is experienced with women, or a woman well-versed in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, present such a person and command her to do everything you instruct her from the examination of the stone at the beginning; the reason for this is to check if the woman is chaste, so she should insert her finger into the woman's body to locate the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Thus if you find it there, cut it below the joint, and then instruct him to incise upon that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if it is not soft, then instruct the midwife to insert the joint into the woman's vagina and feel for the stone, as she places her left hand on the bladder, and compress that with good pressure.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Thus if you find it there, then proceed to gradually extract that from the opening of the bladder towards the parts below as far as its full extent until it reaches the root of the matter.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then incise upon that spot in the middle of the vagina at the root of the matter from whichever part it is to him and center the stone in that part, and ensure that the said member is not dislodged from the stone by cutting below it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And let the incision be small at first; then insert the probe into that incision, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the incision according to the amount by which you know the stone will be expelled from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the types of stones are various: some are small and hard, others are sharp and rough, long and round, and having ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you should know the types of stones as you signify according to what you wish to describe.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you wish to have blood flow, apply triturated vitriol to that area for one hour until the blood is drawn, and then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	Take note that you should prepare for yourself the instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of stones from men, so that you may be aided by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see blood flowing and you know that the expulsion of the blood is from the artery that is incised, then sprinkle powder on the area and bind it with powders and bandages, and do not repeat this; leave the stone and do not extract it, for the patient will likely die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the intensity of the bleeding has subsided after several days and the area has become clean, then you may return to your operation until the stone is dislodged.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of section on hernia repair.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia is nothing but an aggregation of moisture in the white membrane below the tendon of the groin containing the intestines, and it is called a sac.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it is in the proper fatty layer which nature has prepared for the intestines, so that it seems to be another intestine; and it is the tendon of the groin between the white membrane we have mentioned, and this is not the case.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the groin muscles, because this material accumulates there, and sometimes it happens due to impact on the groin.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture may have various colors, for its color can be leaning towards yellowish or blood-red, or reddish, or black and foul, or watery and white, and the latter is better.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	Here are the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is such as this: for if it is in the white skin that we have mentioned, then at that time the abscess is round, inclining slightly in length like a hen's egg, and the skin appears red, because the moisture extends from it on all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper fatty tissue, then the abscess is round but divided like an egg, and for this reason it is estimated to be another kind of egg.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the flesh of the skin and the white skin, then feel below with your finger.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then observe the color of the moisture in the abscess through a probe with which its form is preceded; and according to what appears in the marks of the probe, judge about what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	When we come to the treatment of it with iron, then it is necessary that we command the patient to be bled if this is possible for you, and then apply the body of the instrument to it.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And let the patient lie supine on his back on something raised slightly, and place below him clean cloths.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit you on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand on his right, who will extend his hand from one of the two sides to the flesh of the skin and to the part near the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a broad probe and cut the flesh of the skin at the proper place along its length near the abscess.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And the incision should be made according to the rule equally distant from the line where the hair on the genitals begins, until it reaches the white membrane.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And scrape that area, and observe, and be careful so that you do not incise it; and your scraping of the place where you are scraping should gradually continue until it is suspended on the flesh more delicately, carefully examining the scraping according to the quantity possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the membrane full of water at a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two lips of the incision with forceps, and extend the membrane in the parts above; and do not touch the part containing the genitals, and incise the membrane in that manner as is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And incise that area either entirely or in pieces, and especially the thin part carefully, for if you do not examine the incision meticulously, there is no assurance that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the flesh protrudes from its place at the time of your operation, after you have completed the incision of the membrane, return it inside, and then adjust the two lips of the genital part with stitches, and then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the flesh corrupted by some other illness, then you should tie off the vessels that are above the suspensory ligament, remove the flesh, and then treat it as we have described.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is aggregated in two separate parts, then you will know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part as you did with the other equally; and if it appears to you to be an operation, then you should perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you should wipe away the blood, and insert into the sections wool submerged in oil or in rose oil; and place afterwards another piece of wool which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over both thighs and the region of the abdomen; and cover with doubled cloths and poultices, and bind those with a bandage according to this method:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then two cloths should be pressed and filled with carded wool according to this pattern; and the ends should be made such that they are pressed against the buttocks or with wet wool, and should be attached to the structure in the belt of the breeches, and one end should reach into the cleft between the buttocks, and the second should reach to the part above the genitals, and two ends on each side over both thighs, and all attachments should be adjusted in the belt of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases this hernia is treated artificially with cautery at the section of the groin; and it is that you take a thin knife-like cautery and insert it along the line between the genitals, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white fatty tissue containing the fluid becomes visible, and then you take a cautery in this shape:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is shaped like the Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce that fatty tissue, and ignite it until all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the fatty tissue with hooks, and strip it off with hooks, and cauterize it with a thin ignited cautery; and cut away that part as much as possible until you have removed all of it; and be careful that your hands are not burned by the fire.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and longer lasting in stopping blood flow, and better than an operation with cutting.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If there is opposition to you in the form of an abscess at the time of cutting or cauterization, or blood flow, then choose the method that suits your situation from what has been described, and opt for the treatment that seems most appropriate to you based on what has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is small and does not dare to undergo a second operation due to its horror, then administer a puncture as I recommend; and you should be certain, from what we have said about the signs, that the hernia is fluid-filled.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Now you should have the patient sit on some raised cushion, and then puncture the abscess at its lowest part below the navel, making the puncture as long as the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the incision be wide enough to allow all the fluid to drain out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then apply pressure to the area and bandage it so that the remaining fluid can drain out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat it until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is opposition to the flow of fluid when you puncture it: this happens only because the white membrane in the wound opening resists and prevents the outflow of fluid. Then you should place a small cup or instrument used to extract water from cysts into the wound, as described; or apply pressure around the wound with something small.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns, and it is waited for about five months or so then; and when it has been absorbed, then it should be punctured according to that method, because in this way the patient will have passed his days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the section about flesh hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the section about this hernia, there is great fear of death in severe cases; therefore, in my view, it is best to avoid it and be saved by that better option.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am now recalling the operation on that one and the specifics of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses arise in those parts where the genitals are composed, and this happens for various reasons: either due to acute and harsh excess, which is discharged into the genitals, or due to impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the skin, and it is not relieved by pain, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And when the abscess is calcified, its color is dark, and it does not respond to treatment.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And in some cases, it is caused by the entanglement of arteries, and by the inflammation of those that are already perceived upon reflection, or by the inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But what is caused by the inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersal of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it does not need to be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	He who is treated by inflating a vein is not dispersed for any cause owing to the compression thereof.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible to perform a section on this particular area as well as on other flesh; and that you should incise the tendon of the groin muscles, and immediately there will be the membrane above, and extract the white fat, and free the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, and tie them, and cut the suspensory ligaments after you have freed it from all parts.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Then if the membrane has already united with those flesh parts, now you should extract the membrane and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion between any part of the fat, or between what is between the vessels, now you should free all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if it is a natural growth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, now you should incise all that there is and extract the membrane as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then when your operation is complete, now fill the wound with wool infused in olive oil and wine; and immediately treat it with the other methods until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernias that involve viscera.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	A vit is an abscess wrapped in some kind of membrane similar to that around the softening of the testicles, and it makes exercise and walking difficult due to the condition.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	In the treatment of this disease, one must be cautious because it is preceded by a certain memory or recollection.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, it is necessary to call it an operation as they did in the beginning.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And he says that you should make the patient sit on a raised stool; then pull up the scrotum with your fingers; and then tie the cords of the genitalia to the parts below; and have another assistant do this while you extend them forcefully.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then incise with a sharp and broad knife across the veins so that the veins are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Then carefully remove it completely as we have described in the extraction of arteries, which is done on the surface.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Then place a needle with double fine thread in it, and tie one end at the first location where you act, and tie the other end at the last of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Then incise those in the middle location with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated from the fetid and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Then treat the wound as you would treat other wounds where you want healing to take place, so that the veins that cause one of the testicles to darken do not become an issue, for it is not harmful if done properly.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if you act on all the veins, then it is necessary to remove the testicles or to bind them with the veins, so that they are deprived of all nourishment due to the cutting of the veins, and become atrophied, or to bind them in such a way that it does not harm them.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter Sixty-Five.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the Treatment of Intestinal Hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that occurs when the caphac is extended over the front part of the sides of the abdominal cavity, because through this rupture some of the bowels enter.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the caphac or near it, and these two types occur for various reasons: either by impact, by jumping, by shouting, by lifting some heavy object, or by similar actions.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the caphac, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and not suddenly, and it appears as an abscess equal in size to what the caphac compresses within the bowel.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it is due to a section of the caphac, because at the beginning it causes intense pain suddenly; and it appears as an abscess different from what is normally seen near the navel, and this is because of the protrusion of the bowel, and the body of it beyond the caphac.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And in some cases, the membrane is detached along with the bowel, and this type of intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And in some cases, it is caused by gas, and in other cases the bowel forms a fissure where it is trapped, and this causes great pain to the patient, and often causes severe pain, especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of these types of this illness with iron, there is fear, because it is necessary to avoid any risk in such cases.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	Here is the translation:
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	From the side cut the fold by which the covering of the testicles is attached above, and incise the covering of the testicles entirely along its length; then insert hooks into both sides of the section as you deem necessary to hold it open.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if you make the section according to the quantity that it is possible for you to remove of that part.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then peel away the fatty tissue which lies beneath the covering of the testicles until the hard white membrane of each part is exposed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Now insert your finger in the place where the testicle is attached, between the white membrane that lies beneath the covering of the testicle, and between the subsequent membranes, and loosen any adhesions that are present behind the testicle.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then use your left hand to pull the covering of the testicles away from the parts, and with this extend the white membrane upwards with your hand, and lift the testicle with the membrane towards the section; and instruct an assistant to raise the testicle upwards while you dissolve any adhesions behind it with a solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And feel with your fingers to ensure that there is no cause for concern with the bowel wrapped in the hard white membrane.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause for concern, then place it back into the abdomen below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle with seven fine threads, and insert it through the back of the membrane which lies beneath the covering of the testicles that you have sectioned; then cut the ends of the threads so that four remain, and tie them in some figure resembling a cross; and ligature those parts of the membrane we have mentioned below the covering of the testicles with a strong thread.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Here are the contents wrapped in bandages the extremities of the veins and tie them firmly with a ligature so that some of the veins which nourish those cannot transmit any cause by which an abscess may not occur from this.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And tie another ligature above the first ligature, a space of three fingers away; and between these two ligatures leave hanging from the skin the part which is below the scrotal cord in quantity with the size of a finger, and incise all around it according to roundness, and remove it from there.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then incise in the part below the scrotal cord where the section will bleed and discharge as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound and place it on the plague; and apply the ligature as we have recommended (and sometimes the skin is cauterized, which we mentioned near the incision to prevent bleeding, for some times this happens) and leave the ligature so that it does not fall.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the dressing of it is delayed, hot water should be applied and placed on that so that it does not fall as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with the usual treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	On Ventral Hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this type of hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has dared to treat it with surgery.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	The first surgeons said that it is done as we have recounted in the hernia that is on the abdomen; which is that you tie the vessels near the section where you have made it easy for yourself; and near there dry up in the middle place with regard to the abscess, so that the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter .lxvii.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the division that is made in the glands.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	In some cases, there is rupture in the glands as we have said, and examine the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And they do not assign any cause for the pouch to the genitalia; and if they do, it is rare; and it returns to this in all cases.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged with this, a narrow opening in the duct through which the pouch descends into the duct; and it happens that due to the extension of the duct, which is in the glands as we have said, because the duct is stretched, and then becomes softened, the area becomes abscessed and must be examined.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment for it is with cautery as was preceded in the narration.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And in some cases, it is treated with iron according to this method: the patient lies on their back between two chairs, and then the area of the rupture of the abscesses is dried by examining and sectioning horizontally according to the length mentioned.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then stretch the white duct that is below the groin until it is exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Take the knife and place it above the prominent part of the navel, and press it onto the belly button.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then apply the two prominent points at the end of the line of the navel, and join them to each other with a suture.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the end of the knife, and do not incise the navel completely, nor extend the wound, nor for any other reason as I will teach you in the treatment of an intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat it as you would treat other wounds, and when you incise the area, clean it and restore the wound until it is healed; for the navel is contracted and the prominence of rupture has not been adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this location, for it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the cord of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Often the cord of the testicles is softened in some men because the flesh that lies within it is softened, and this requires careful attention.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for the one who is asked to treat this condition to have the patient lie on his side, and incise the entire cord that is softened onto the natural cord; and then join the two edges with a suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, apply the excess of the softened cord to three or four stitches and with a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Here is the translation:
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter lxix.
De castracio.	On Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, yet for cause it is read to me that I should remember it in this book; and the remembrance of it is not necessary except for two ways, of which one is so that when asked about it, a physician knows how to cure it when it occurs; and the other way is that we have sometimes need to castrate certain animals for our benefit from them, such as horses, oxen, pigs, and similar beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by crushing or by cutting.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in the one that is performed by crushing, the method of the operation is that we should immerse the animal in warm water until the testicles become softened and descend.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those [testicles] in your hand until they resolve and do not appear below the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration performed by cutting and sectioning, hold the animal and press the scrotum of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then lift the scrotum, and make an incision on each side until you proceed with both sides.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then cut those parts that you will have separated.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause for infection on those parts, but ensure the wound is clean and proper so that it heals over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better, which is done by inversion, because inversion leaves some cause of the testicles for the animal to desire sex.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And properly treat the illness until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphrodism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphrodozia in men is according to two methods: one is when there appears in the space between the testicles a figure of female parts, where hair also develops.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes there appears a passage for urine in the space between the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, there is one type: it is that the female organ above the pubis appears as two testicles of a man slightly towards the inside, like the scrotum of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three types: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you should cut away those tight tissues until the excess flesh is removed, and then treat them as you would other illnesses.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second type for men, where there is urine passing through a passage between the testicles, there is no treatment or surgery to address it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On the treatment of protrusions and raised flesh due to causes related to women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	The spot is often light in color and is adjusted according to natural causes within which it is situated and is made with regard; and in some women, it is magnified so much that it spreads just as in men and prevails even into intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then take the superfluity of linting with your hand or with one piece and incise it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not delay in incising, especially at the beginning of the swelling, so that it does not become a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And immediately treat her with the cure for such wounds so that she may be healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Malignant flesh that arises from the ulceration of the mother within which it fills that area and is easily spread to other parts like a tail (and for this reason some of the earliest called it "tail disease"); therefore, we should incise it as we would linting, and treat her so that she may be healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	On the Treatment of Ulcers.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Alratica is when the hymen of the woman is not perforated, or the opening is small.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	It is accidental due to illness that preceded it, and that is caused either by flesh poorly adjusted or by a subtle or thick obstruction.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it occurs either at the beginning of the swelling, or on its sides, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part, and you should prohibit intercourse and pregnancy, and easily prohibit menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	Of that knowledge is made by observation of the menstruation, if the obstruction is apparent, proceed promptly; but if it is not apparent, then wait around there with your fingers or with light.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to a small cicatrix and it has opened between the two lips, then you should cut it and disrupt that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is that you place upon the two lips poultices, and then place your fingers carefully between both of them.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should lie on her back, her thighs spread apart, and then spread both lips forcefully so that the small cicatrix is ruptured and the obstruction is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take linen and dip it in oil and place that on the spot, and let a man hold it there for a day so that the cut area does not heal too quickly.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the cicatrix is thick and hard, then it is necessary for you to cut that with a scalpel or with a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to flesh, then suspend that for a moment, and incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And prepare the medicines that stop blood flow without causing harm, such as helleborus, dragon's blood, and cerate, mixed with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a lead tube that is wide so that the wound does not heal too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep that for several days and administer dry heat.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And this should be treated along with the other treatment for consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And in some cases accidents occur during the major formation of other tissues, and at these times it is necessary to incise according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if this is due to a chronic abscess, the chronic abscess which is in the main part should not be treated contrary to it in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids and similar conditions that occur in the genital area of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are appreciated as swellings of the openings of small veins from which blood flows continuously; and when these hemorrhoids become old, they form tumors.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And now I have mentioned in the division the kinds of these and the signs of them, and to say which of them receive treatment and which do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and tumors when they are in the area of the main part and do not appear to the senses, at this time treatment should not be applied forcefully.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the opening of the main part and which can be felt, these are the ones that can be treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary to place the woman in a warm bath and then extend the tumor with forceps or rough cloth, and incise those that need it with scissors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder should be applied to those that bleed from one of the powders used for incisions without chewing, such as acacia and similar substances.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Soak the pieces of flesh in cold water for an hour, and then lay it in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then place it in a decoction of sumac, orange peel, walnuts, and similar substances.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of barley and mix it with honey and sour wine, and apply a plaster made from this mixture to the back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is clotted, that is good; otherwise, apply two cupping glasses to it, and perform incisions at the sites of the mammary glands.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and soak it in the juice of cilantro or aniseed or wild garlic in sour wine, and apply it to the affected area; and afterwards treat the area with ointments until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But if the patient is of a dry and harsh constitution, you should incise what needs to be done according to what I have said, with caution.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the piercing of the bladder in an accidental injury to the abdomen.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various types of abscesses occur in the abdomen, such as cancerous, stone-like, ulcerative, hemorrhoidal, herpetic, phlegmonous, and fistulous abscesses, as well as piles and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already described these illnesses and their types and the signs of them, and their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	Here is the translation:
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp due to percussion and phlegm and fever, and if it turns red and there is a sensation over it, do not attempt to puncture it then, but treat it with what aids maturation until the acuity of these symptoms ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then have the woman lie on a cushion with two cushions; let her recline on her back and adjust her legs so that they are raised below the belly, and spread her thighs apart, and place her arms above her head, and bind certain parts with bandages as is appropriate.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife should stand at the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the birth canal is prepared, the form of which will be described in those cases that are about to be discussed.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you wish to administer this instrument, place it along the axis of the birth canal of the woman, and what is inserted into the birth canal from the instrument should not exceed its natural diameter, and observe the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the diameter of the birth canal, then you should place pillows around the woman's abdomen to prevent any further insertion of instruments into the birth canal.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And place the lubricant that flows from the instrument on the side below and let the practitioner hold the instrument and rotate it so that the opening of the birth canal is prepared.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the prolapse appears and is touched by hand and is red and moist, then you should dry that part of it with a dry sponge or cloth.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the sanies is evacuated, then you should place upon the wound a medicated cotton soaked in rose oil or green oil in which there is some styptic quality; and apply the compress to the section just above the wound.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And apply above the wound and on the perineum clean wool soaked in water in which mallows have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And it should be treated appropriately for about two days until you find the method that is suitable for this healing.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And in some cases, the wound and the affected area should be washed with water, and then cleansed with water and honey, and afterwards with water in which lily root or long-leaved artemisia has been boiled, and then return to the method.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep in a wounded area, then you should be prohibited from treating it with iron, except treat it as we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To instruct midwives in how to treat male embryos when there is an unnatural condition as shown in the figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	The necessary cause is that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of normal childbirth by its signs, and it is when you see the woman press below and desire to smell the air, and she is troubled by what is above her, and hastens the expulsion of the fetus; then you know that this birth is according to a natural figure, and the first is over her head, and the second either suspended or hanging from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	When you see those signs, then it is necessary to compress the abdomen so that the embryo descends gently because when they descend over their head, they come out of it on the second one, and this stripping from those excesses must be done with proper cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	This is another unnatural and unsuitable birth because when the embryo is born on its buttocks and the body of the child is born in front of its head and its feet, with one hand or foot before it, or its head and hand or foot to the side, and very easily turned over its own neck, resembling the figures of unsuitable births.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those matters and to guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I show all the figures of those births, and which kind of birth each one is so that its meaning may be understood by them and they may stand upon it.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus is born over its head by natural effort, and this is difficult for the woman and labor is strenuous, and sometimes her strength has already been weakened, then prepare that mixture, or let the women have it, and evaporate the concoction with fenugreek seeds and moist oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And immediately the midwife should insert her fingers and make an incision with those scissors, or dry that area with her fingernail until it stops being moist.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the abdomen of the woman so that the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not descend, then the woman should be sprinkled with powdered rue and powdered fenugreek mixed with honey.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then command the patient to blow his nose and sneeze while in a supine position; and place his mouth and nose over a vessel for one hour, because the matter will be discharged immediately.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both parts of the discharge come out at the beginning, then afterwards you must reduce them gradually with ease.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if the woman does not obey the instrument, then have her lie on a cushion and lift her up slightly, and then strike the cushion on the ground; and hold the woman so that she does not fall from the impact.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the mucus is not returned and the discharge stops, then incise those areas and extract the remaining matter of the discharge or tie the body part with a cloth and extract it evenly, because this will be discharged immediately.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Remove the embryo along with its membranes.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the discharge is on its membranes, then you must push them upwards, and then turn the discharge gently, and then even it out, and then take some of it and gradually spread it.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when it is expelled into the cavity, then you command the patient to strain himself, and have him sneeze with conditions, because it will be discharged if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not discharged as we have recommended, then you return the discharge gradually until you place it back to its normal position, because it will be expelled quickly at that time.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prevented from being expelled by everything we have recommended, then take mastic and dissolved gum, and mix them thoroughly in a mortar with good pounding, and then apply this mixture to the woman's cervix, at the bottom of her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And after cutting the hair in the area with clean water, enter until you reach the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the upper parts of the body are inflamed, then perform a smoke inhalation therapy with myrtle and apply that to it.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the smoke inhalation therapy has lasted for an hour, then make them sit on a chair, and afterwards let them sneeze and open their mouth wide, and take that out, and press the lower part of their belly lightly with compression, because the phlegm will soon be expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	 Collect the phlegm from their teeth and their hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the phlegm is expelled in this manner, then gently encourage them to clench their fists little by little; and afterwards have the patient lie down with their head on a pillow, and place their feet hanging down, and let them sit up on the bed, and massage their hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then gently press on the patient's abdomen little by little, and afterwards extract what is behind their ears near the feet until it is prepared in the part closest to them.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the phlegm is not expelled, then take hold of their feet and move them vigorously, and afterwards gently press what is above the hypochondria little by little until the phlegm can rise to the upper parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then gently encourage them to clench their fists little by little and command the patient to strain themselves until the phlegm is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	 Collect the phlegm laterally by placing it between one of their hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Here is the translation:
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if it cannot be done by hand, then place the patient on his back and strike the things to be dislodged with strong percussion, and afterwards apply dressings made of mucilage.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if childbirth has begun, then place the woman in that position and proceed with the reduction of the fetus, bringing it into alignment according to its natural figure, and cause her to sneeze and instruct someone to apply pressure inward until it is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Examine the fetus on its back with its limbs extended and the bandage around it at the level of its navel.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Let the midwife hold the fetus and then gradually turn that little one, so that it becomes easier to deliver.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is done and the proper time has passed, then place a poultice over that area made of oil and mucilage as recommended.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then instruct them to press gently little by little, and when you have done this, place the woman on her back and instruct her to lean on her right side, and then instruct someone to apply pressure; and cause her to sneeze as needed.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The delivery of the fetus prepared on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you see the horror of the mother according to this method, consider it carefully, and then you incise the second area with your fingernail until it is evacuated of the humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of the mother, then you incise that area near the pubis, so that it is not retained and dies.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Here is the translation:
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The outcome of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are often born at once, but sometimes three or four [are born], though this is rare and difficult to occur; however, these causes are due to nature, not will.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And among those, whether they are multiple or not, a second birth sometimes occurs, and they are separated by the cleft, distinguishing them entirely through the umbilical cord of each one. And sometimes they come out together as if it were one fetus due to natural swiftness, but at other times they come out together in an unworthy manner, as we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some are difficult in their delivery and reach what we have mentioned about the unnatural figures, then you should care for them as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does what she should with both ease and skill, whether it be promptness or delay, and uses her ingenuity according to every figure as needed for the safe delivery of the child.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	A reminder of what is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarried.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes they are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and sometimes up to ten; and it has been verified that a woman miscarried at six months, and another carried them all fully formed, which cause was determined by the measurement of the wise scholars.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this must be known by the midwife because it is easy to mistake one for another, and therefore she should know what is needed in each case.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the Extraction of a Dead Fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you are treating a dead fetus as we have said in the division of treatment and it does not come out otherwise, then you must use an operation. At that time, you should consider whether the woman is healthy and free from any of the conditions for which she is feared to suffer loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	At that time, the woman should be placed on her back on the bed with her buttocks raised and her head lowered.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the attendant should hold both of her legs or tie her to the bed so that her body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you should moisten the mother's mouth with olive oil and mastic of hartwort and fenugreek and linseed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and mastications, and then insert her hand into the mother, and then search with her hand for the place where the hooks are in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And the appropriate places for this are as follows: then you should consider whether the fetus is positioned to descend head first, and at that time you place the hooks in its hands, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or under its chin, or in its clavicle, or in the proper areas of its ribs, or under its armpits.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the descent is foot first, then in the navel area, or in the middle of its ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	Take the needle in your right hand, and place its curve at that point which is between the fingers of your left hand, and insert it easily into one of those places we have mentioned, until it reaches the diseased area.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And place and insert another needle next to it, or a third if necessary, so that there is equal attraction, and not extension according to its straightness alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And do this to all parts, so that the extraction of it is eased in the same way as is done for the painless removal of teeth.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And in the area where extension should be softened; and if any part is resistant, then it is necessary for the midwife to anoint some of those places with oil and insert them carefully and rotate there what is resistant.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if the part of the fetus is dislocated, now the needles should be moved to the place that hurts more; and do this until all of the fetus is delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is dislocated in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to its contraction, then wrap a cloth around that one; and subsequently extract that one until all of it is delivered, and cut it either at the joint of the hand or at the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do the same for the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large, or constriction occurs during extraction, or it is in the head of the tightly fitted water bag, then you should insert between the fingers and cut open the head to remove the water, or use an instrument called “alundat,” the shape of which will be among the shapes of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And it should appear as if the task is of great head by nature: and now it is necessary to incise that tumor which is bound, or to take that tumor out in this way as we have said; and then extract from the bones that which is there with the forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is swollen and constricted below the clavicle, then it should be split so that the moisture which is in the sinews may effuse.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated, nor swollen in appearance, then you should incise the head as soon as possible according to what seems best to you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the lower part of the abdomen is abscessed or is in a state of hydrops, then it is necessary for you to puncture that area through which flows the moisture that is there.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the tumor is on the upper thighs, then the attraction of it is distant and the direction of it towards the mouth of the urethra is remote.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is constricted below the abdomen and the thighs, then it is necessary for you to extract that tumor wrapped in a cloth which you have enveloped around your hand, and to cut open the abdomen and the thighs so that the fluid that is there may flow out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members remain still and turn the head, then place your left hand in between; but if the mouth of the urethra is open, then insert your hand into the prepuce, and search for the head there, and pull it together with those mentioned into the mouth of the urethra, and then insert one or two fingers, and pull them along with that.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the urethra is constricted by an abscess which has occurred, then it should not be pressed upon; instead, it is necessary to administer moist and fatty applications.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Apply plasters; and follow with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the condition is on the side, then at that time, if possible, puncture it; and apply what we have said about the living condition.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then cut it into pieces and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And it is necessary not to leave any cause inside for the second time.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your entire operation, then apply what we have said about the treatment for boils or abscesses that may occur as a result.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs, then bathe in astringent waters and proceed with the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman in whose womb there was a dead fetus, and above that focus another pregnancy occurred, and the other fetus was also lifeless.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to one who had an abscess near their navel for a long time; it became swollen internally with a fetus, and began to expel water.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to treat them, and treated them for a long time, but the condition did not improve.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied to them several causes of strong attraction in the form of plasters, and extracted one bone from them, and after a few days, extracted another bone; and I was very surprised, as there were no bones in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore, when treating the wound, remove the bones that are present in its various positions, and if it has already been treated for a long time in such a manner, correct it with a small piece of wood.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And it is not strange for this to be so, because in this lies the science and aid for what the surgeon uses his hand to administer in treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary for extracting the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of a spiral in which the largest is used:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a clamp with which it equalizes the leaves, to this clamping there are two spirals at the two ends of two branches.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this spiral should be finer than the string, and it should be made of reed or wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each branch should be about two fingers and the margin of each side about one finger, and the length of each is half a palm plus a little; and in the middle of the two branches there are two adjustments made from the same material as the branches which are fixed, their length being half a palm plus a bit more, and the width of each being about two fingers, or a bit more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two adjustments should be inserted into the mouth of the larger one so that they are opened when you rotate the two prescribed spirals.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another similar form, but finer and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It should be made of reed or wood according to the appearance of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the end of the side of the wound make additions in this way as often as necessary, and the length of those additions is about one palm, and the width of each is two of these.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the largest of them, then have the woman lie on her back with her legs hanging down, which is between the thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument in this way as you do with scissors equally according to the quantity that you want from the size of the largest opening until the speculum does what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of dizziness which the ancients described:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of propulsion with which the feces is expelled:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of connection where the large intestine is connected to the stomach
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps at the ends of which there are teeth, as often as necessary, and some versions are made long like forceps according to this form, as often as necessary, with teeth like those of a reed with which it is incised and connected.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of connection in a few cases:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of one having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of one having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps at the ends of which there are teeth with which the head of the feces is grasped:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a speculum having two ends at which the head is divided:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	With those instruments so exercised, and when their kinds are multiplied and prepared, the artisans should do so in a quicker manner for their operation and better serve people according to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you should prepare those instruments, whichever they may be, because the necessity of them is unavoidable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of the extraction of the second [incision or procedure].
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second birth is retained during childbirth, you should command the patient to hold their breath, and then make them sneeze under certain conditions. Place your hand over the mouth and nose of the patient, and if it causes expulsion by this method, that is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a vessel and pierce its cover with a hole and place it under the mouth of the mother, along with herbs such as mugwort, chamomile, anise, camomilla, Arabian saffron, cinnamon, and sage.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All of these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the vessel, and place it over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a reed tube in the mouth of the mother, and hold it there until the vapor reaches the concavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make her sneeze as we have said, and the second birth will be quickly expelled.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this treatment delays and is not expelled, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or malt jelly, and then insert it into the womb and search for the second birth with it. When you find it, pull it out little by little. If it is stuck to the mother's placenta, then insert her hand as we have recommended, and when she finds the second birth, extract it bit by bit so that the mother does not suffer from excessive traction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Take care that it is turned to the right and left with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And it should be adjusted in the amount of attraction, for it will obey and avoid adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the opening of the mother is narrowed, we have already recommended the treatment through sneezing and the medication of the ulcer with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not expelled by all the causes we have recommended, then guard against fatiguing it through repeated attempts at extraction, but rather ensure that what has come out of it and lies in the opening of the mother be attached to the woman's cervix, and subsequently treat it with cauterization; for this will cause it to contract over a few days and it will dissolve and be expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when you contract it, it causes severe pain in the head and stomach, and this aggravates the illness; therefore, it is necessary to administer sublimations and appropriate treatments for this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients already used sublimation of nitrated tartar and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of the instrument with which a woman is subjected to sublimation due to the retention of menstruation and secondary conditions:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of wood or horn.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the thin end should be placed in the vagina and the wide end over the fire, and the sublimation should be placed on the embers of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep that instrument inside until the sublimation is consumed, then repeat with another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of the treatment of the unopened anus of a child.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many children are born with their anuses not perforated, which must be carefully and skillfully opened.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then it is the midwife's duty to pierce with her finger that said orifice; and if not, she should use a sharp spatula to pierce it, being careful not to touch the rectum.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then apply poultices made of flour mixed with vinegar and oil; and afterwards, treat that orifice until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it is obstructed, then insert a cannula for several days, and remove it when the child wants to pass gas.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it happens that the anus becomes obstructed due to the consolidation of an abscess or swelling; then it is necessary to incise that consolidation, and afterwards treat it as we have described for treatment with lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of the treatment of fistulas that occur below.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that occur in the lower region near the anus are usually small and thick, which often appear near the outside of the anus or in the space between the buttocks.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is one fistula or multiple.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And as that small swelling becomes old and discharges watery or pus-like white fluids, and sometimes these fistulas penetrate deeply.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And these deep-seated fistulas are known by what comes out of them through discharge and flatulence; sometimes the discharge is bad, and it easily indicates the nature of these conditions.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	Of those fistulas, some extend into the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the shaft of the penis; and some penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the root of the bone.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in that which is known as a penetrating fistula into the rectum and a non-penetrating one, it is when you insert your finger into the rectum, and introduce a fine thread of hair or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is tortuosity in that one, then introduce a fine probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair with your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel any of that and there is no sign of any cause of evacuation such as pus, worms, or gas, as we have said, then you know it is non-penetrating, and you can proceed with the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the shaft of the penis, then the significance of that is similar to urine from it and the prohibition is for that which the place requires to be consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and there is pain around the area, then the sign of that is that the probe goes through here if there is no tortuosity into the bone, and there is pain around the affected area; and you will have a continuous discharge from it; and medication does not work in that case, nor does it consolidate on its own.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the treatment for those is the labor and futility of many physicians, upon which such cases depend.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing with iron is expected as I shall tell you, and this is what I and my predecessors have done.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient should lie between your thighs with his buttocks raised and his hips within reach, the objects being inclined towards his belly, and then insert a lead probe or an iron one if it is in the tortuous fistula, until you know where the probe passes.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that is the case with the patient around the anus, then you should insert your finger into the anus.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel with your finger that the probe can easily penetrate, or what you feel between your finger and that tissue or flesh, then you know for certain that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that one, because there is no healing in that one, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some might say that it heals in some men slowly.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the treatment in which help is expected, you should ignite a cautery subtly according to the size of the fistula, as was previously described, and insert that heated instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those tissues around the fistula are sealed tightly, resembling the quill of a bird.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then treat that with bandages wrapped in butter until all those sealed tissues heal, and then treat it with medicines that promote flesh growth and consolidation. If it heals, that is good; but if not, then it will not heal at any time by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters and does not penetrate further in, you tell which is inside the anus, and between that and the probe there lies a thin layer of flesh or cicatrix, and sometimes the fistula runs into that part where it lies on the surface of the buttock. Then the region around the beginning of the fistula dries up, and you see that drying extend along with the probe until its tip reaches the place to which the end of the probe extends, and through this the passage is freed and cured.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those parts of the flesh that are affected by fistulas, which resemble the hollow part of a goose quill and do not tear any part of them for any reason.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if blood flows out when you are operating on those parts of the flesh, then either the mildest or the pus-filled area should be cauterized with fire or with a sharp medicine, for cauterizing with fire adjusts two good habits: it tightens the adjusted flesh and stops the bleeding by drying out the moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then treat that with bandages wrapped in boiled cloth or soft linen until the area gets better, and afterward cure the wound with hard flesh-growing dressings that generate and strengthen new tissue.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And use medicines that have styptic and drying properties; when the area is restored, it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula already extends inside the base of the anus and is long from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore, if you find that the probe and between it there is only a thin layer of cicatrix or flesh, and it is ready for penetration, then do not proceed with the operation but wait according to faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to be administered in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry it until you achieve the contraction necessary for you to introduce what is proper and suitable for healing; do not proceed with drying if it does not allow access to the cavity containing the pus, and ensure that this is done without causing discomfort to the patient; then treat it as we have said to make it heal easily; or lengthen that flap and clean that pus which you dried within near the anus, as we have mentioned, or by trying with another sharp instrument, and then clean those ulcerated tissues which appear in the drying process through incision; and then strive to restore the whole wound through drying, and if the upper opening of the pus is not healed, and if the fistula remains open at the anal part, it will be easier for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you introduce the probe into the fistula, and it passes around the anus on the surface of the body along the skin and at the edge of the anus, then take a sharp-tipped probe, which is like a needle for preparing the core according to this method:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and introduce it into that faithful wrapping of three layers or around them; then insert the probe into the pus-filled fistula until you achieve the necessary contraction.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates the edge of the anus towards the inside, then you extract the pus from that tract as though you were inserting your finger into the anus; and remove the tip of the pus and tie both ends tightly, and keep it like this for one or two days, and when you incise the pus in the flesh, secure it well so that those tissues between the two ends of the pus are divided and can heal.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Regarding the treatment of the wound, until it is healed and strengthened.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the openings of the fistula are not penetrable, now make them penetrate, in whatever way you have prepared it, but do not move it from its position, because you should not do this so as to not injure the rectum; and then proceed with that until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatum with spines with which the fistula is incised: its curvature should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other, so that you do not injure what is unnecessary, as often happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Regarding the stitching of hemorrhoids in which pus flows during the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids occur in two ways: either they appear around the anus resembling coal pieces, or they appear like grape clusters.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And these can be small or large, and the pus flows continuously from them, and they are single, and appear inside the anus, and at its extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that appear outside the anus are due to less humidity, from which flows yellow water or a little blood mixed continuously, and their appearance depends on the skin color.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit in such a way that the anus opens and the hemorrhoids become visible to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you cover yourself and suspend with hooks or what you have them with your fingernail, and then incise those along their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the hooks do not adhere to them because of their moisture and softness, then take a rough cloth or a cudgel or a flaxen pad, and extract them with these tools. Then immediately incise around them and sprinkle some powder suitable for after the incision upon them, so that it serves as a cauterant; or cauterize them according to what is described in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And afterward treat them with other remedies until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the pus does not come out, then incise the abscess with an incision that is small and neat, and wash it with water from the well which facilitates prompt evacuation when the pus is squeezed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is easily treated, and you should take them with your finger or hook, and incise them, and afterward treat them as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for one who requires stitching, you should administer the suture in this manner: take fine thread wrapped around a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids at the top part, and let that penetrate with the needle into the incision on the other side, and wrap both ends of the thread below the needle horizontally; and secure the hemorrhoid tightly with strong binding, and then knot the thread and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this for all of them, and leave one of them open and do not sew it up, so that the excess blood can flow from that one.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Place a pad on the wound soaked in rose oil or in cerate; place that on the wound and instruct the patient to lie still.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Place that in a container; when it is prepared, apply those or another treatment until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Fistulas often occur due to the excessive opening of a fissure or constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they become old and do not respond to that medicine, you should scrape those with the point of a scalpel or your fingernail until they are made moist and pus is discharged from them, which prevents their consolidation; then treat them until they are healed.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Now you should scrape those with more vigorous pus removal than the first time until blood appears and they are sufficiently scraped; then treat them until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the treatment of hemisection, which is a key condition.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that hemisection, which is a key condition, appears as small round spots according to the color of the skin, similar to the head of a nail, and it occurs throughout the body but more so in the lower parts below the waist and in those areas, causing pain throughout the body.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Then it is necessary to incise what is within the circumference of the spot, and grasp it with forceps or fingers, and eradicate it from its root; then treat that area.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the surrounding area after treating the spot itself.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	A mole is a small raised rough and round fistula on the surface of the body, and spots appear in most children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The treatment for it is to extend and incise that, or apply within it some fat or grease that is in a container.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or with acute medication.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And they are eradicated inversely and non-inversely with the instrument of which I spoke.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	A mole called an ant's nest is a small fluffy or thickly fistulated elevation on the surface of the body with threads running into it. When it is scratched, it feels like being bitten by an ant, and it forms around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The treatment for it is to take a needle of hawk's feather or eagle's feather, and let it be strong, and place that over the ant's nest so that it contains the circle within the circumference of the needle; then revolve your hand with the needle so that you incise what is around the ant's nest, and place that in the thread running into the flesh, so that you eradicate the ant's nest from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a needle of iron or of steel in this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The upper part of the needle should be thin, blunt (that is, not perforated), wrapped so that when held by the finger it is comfortable and its rotation is easy.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize the ant's nest, do so as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	On the form of the instruments which are administered to castrate.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes castrations are performed with silver or lead or melted and hammered metal; and sometimes they are done with instruments large and small according to those to whom they are administered, for the one who is treated in the cure of small children should be small; and for those whose testicles are soft or painful, their castrations should be smaller.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of a large and simple castration:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the cannula above, where the sac is tied, should be wide according to this manner; and it should be at the point where the sac is tied as you see.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the lower end of the cannula, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (that is, not open) like a lion's tail, tapering slightly; and on one side of it there are two grooves, and on the other side one groove, and the width of the groove should be according to the thickness of the rays and somewhat larger.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines are placed should be made of animal bladder or sheep's wool, and the length of it should be one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be perforated with threads as it is rolled; and the space between the threads should be as thick as a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those threads strong honey from raw honey, or around them; and tightly fit the bag to them; and when you place the bag in it, it should be tight at the head of the castration between two distinct constrictions, and immediately castrate each thread. But the quality of castrating with that is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and be careful not to make it too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Let the patient lie on their back, and raise his buttocks with something under him, such as a cushion or a folded cloth; then anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or with egg white or with fenugreek mucilage or something similar. Then gently introduce it into the anus, and the assistant takes the bag and presses it vigorously until everything that is in the rectum is evacuated. Then remove the probe from the rectum and let the patient lower his buttocks to the side.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine induces purging, let him endure it as much as possible. And if he sleeps with it throughout the night, it is better for his recovery.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	It is better if you treat him for abdominal diseases and purging with the cautery until he is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then the enema should be light and fine, like those used for children.
De curacio de las plaguas.	On the treatment of plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already stated in the division of the treatment of plagues what was appropriate for the book, and I will now describe the treatment of those with the disease using medicines according to the regimen.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that plagues are varied depending on how the plagues are caused and depending on the location where the plague occurs.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which plagues often occur are things like stone formation, or cuts from a sword or knife, or blows from a lance, or a staff, or an arrow, or similar such causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Here are the plagues that are in the parts of the body such as the plague which affects the head, the neck, the feet, the belly, the groin, and similar ones affecting the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I also recommend the treatment of certain plagues, for which you should pause that reasoning and rule regarding other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple plagues of the head, for the recollection of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, I say that when you encounter a simple plague in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a blow from a stone or similar object and has caused only a slight bruise but is a serious swelling and you fear that an abscess may form, at this moment you should examine carefully and perform phlebotomy on the cephalic vein immediately, and do not delay in doing so; extract blood according to the quantity of the strength of it unless there is some cause prohibiting phlebotomy, especially if the blood coming from the wound is scanty.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And let the phlebotomy be from the opposite side of the affected part; and keep the patient from overeating and from eating heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if any cause prohibits even this minor intervention, then reduce the patient's food intake and do not allow meat or rich foods.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause on the treatment of the plague if an abscess forms, and apply it to the affected area in rose oil alone or in a poultice that has been stypticized.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if you are sure that an abscess will form, then pause in treating the plague if it is recent and the blood has not yet clotted, and also if the air has not changed the powder that I recommend to apply slightly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, then pause for some time until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	And if the wound is large or due to a puncture and does not allow the lips of the wound to be approximated, then approximate those with stitches as I will explain regarding the stitching of such wounds.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound is already uncovered near the bone and skin, and does not require extensive suturing but only a small suspensorium, then incise it and treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in place of stitches, and instruct the patient to eat foods that are light: such as eggs, young animals, and similar items until he is recovered.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find that the dressing is putrid and does not adhere to the wound, then incise all that is necrotic and remove it, and subsequently treat it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding may occur, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then you should inquire about the artery, and if you find that it has not been cut, then you should incise it with a scalpel or tie it off; and if necessity compels you to do what we have said does not comfort the situation, then you should cauterize until the bleeding is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is minor; therefore, you can powder them with this powder, as it will consolidate them before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method for the powder is as follows: take oil of sesame one part, dragon's blood two parts, and burnt frankincense three parts; mix them thoroughly and sieve it, then fill the wound with this powder, and bind it tightly so that it adheres well to the wound, and let it coagulate with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	From above tie tightly the bandages with powder and leave it tied until such time as it is not inflamed, for medicine does not reach it to heal while it remains untied.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes this cure is done alone, when it is not in your presence with the gall of a dragon.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this method of operation is performed on large wounds when it is necessary to place them in a position and make them tight, and for fresh wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially when it is in summer, then do not apply this powder immediately, but instead treat them as we have said, by placing some cooling substances on them, or placing poultices made of flour mixed with water and honey until they begin to show signs of putrefaction; and then proceed with the other treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if it happens that the wound is a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you extract it with a probe.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will describe the treatment of fractures of the head in what follows.
De las plaguas del col.	Of wounds to the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and it is similar to a simple wound of the head.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve of the neck is severed or an artery is cut, then if it is a nerve, there should be no cooling applied but rather treatment to stop bleeding with strong styptic agents, such as zinc oxide and cerate which adhere to the nerves and constrict that area.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	Do not pause on any cause of pain whatsoever, for the substance of the nerves is connected and continues all through to the brain, which is the source of power for all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is to be treated with gentle medicines, such as being washed with warm water, sometimes immersed in scented or unscented oil, and then dried when washed with warm water, along with other mineral preparations applied according to this method, and afterwards moistened.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is severe, then apply stitches, or close its edges, and afterwards treat it with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound is deep or reaches to the lowest part where there is pus, then pierce it at the deepest part.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if an artery is already cut and bleeding occurs, then ligate or cauterize it if the situation requires such action.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the neck or entire spine have already been cut, and only the veins of the neck remain intact, then adjust the edges of the wound with sutures near the bone of the neck without touching it; first equalize it and reduce it to its natural position, and afterwards strengthen it with proper support, and leave it for several days; then treat it with applications that have astringent and stimulating properties until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has already penetrated into the bone, then probe it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all that you can; and what is not accessible to you, leave it until the wound becomes pus-filled, and the swelling subsides.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, sprinkle over it the powder which has been recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if a fistula has formed in the wound, then treat it with the liquid whose description will come shortly in its chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the wounds of the neck or similar ones that are made between the shoulders with a spear, knife, lance, or something similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a thrust with a spear or knife, and you feel the depth of the wound, then consider whether there is swelling when the injured person inhales; now you will know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth to it and the wound is recent with its own blood, then in the first hour you should apply powder, and do not press on it so that the blood does not remain trapped within the depth of the wound and return to the heart and injure the patient, but instead apply a drawing agent, and leave it open for two days.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the application is not within your immediate presence, then place on the wound opening a piece of cloth to absorb what you want from the moisture; and have the patient lie down with the wound so that it can drain what is contained within.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have already passed since the wound appeared and no spasms, trembling of the heart, or constriction of breath has occurred to the patient, and you see other good signs from it, then you know that the wound is safe; and then treat it with poultices and other treatments until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of it is unnecessary and all the time has been open, then you know that a fistula has formed; treat it therefore according to its chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is from a piercing with a knife or dagger, and it is simple on the surface of the flesh or skin, then treat it as you would with stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	And if there has already been an attempt to treat it by piercing into the bone, and some of the fragments are still inside, then you should turn the wound and try to extract those pieces, if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	And if they are not separate, then leave them inside until the wound heals, because their removal would be easier.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other wounds in the other limbs, the treatment is as we have described.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the wounds of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The condition that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, slight, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	In severe cases, you may find the bowel or its nerves affected, which requires more careful and delicate intervention and suturing.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is difficult to treat by other means, and it is important that reducing them back to their proper place is more difficult if you do not promptly intervene to return them to their location, as they will swell and become enlarged, making instruments difficult to use.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore, the best disruption is moderate, because in that case it is not difficult to reduce the bowel, nor is it as difficult as in the two previously mentioned cases.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you should know that there are four methods of suturing the abdomen, but two of these methods are common and suitable for sutures of other wounds on the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	Of two other sutures proper communicate with other wounds, but however more so in the suturing of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you each exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Thus I say that when the wound is small and it has occurred due to some cause of the bowel for that reason, and it becomes difficult to reduce it, then this is in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when the bowel has become inflamed by the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And thus when that is so, then it is necessary for you to warm it in such a way that you immerse a sponge or cloth wet with lukewarm water alone, or soak it in scented water, and cyperus, and spica, and apply it to the bowel until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes I do this in cases where there is styptic quality, and it is better than water alone for resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And thus when you see the inflammation being resolved, then you moisten the bowel with water in which chamomile and mallows are infused, for by this the instrument is alleviated somewhat.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the instrument is irritated near this treatment, then divide the rupture slightly with an instrument with which hemorrhoids are incised.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better, when it is appropriate that there be no cutting, and it should not be necessary to dry out near necessity and deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, this is its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the sharp side of the probe, and the other part not sharp, and the tip subtle, yet not as delicate as a scalpel, but rather slightly blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And so when the wound is enlarged and the edges are separated from the belly, now it is necessary that its reduction follow the shape of the natural form, in its proper place, if possible on that, for better is it.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is wide and it is in the lower part of the belly, now you must make the patient lie on their back, and place their arms closer to their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you place their head and feet higher than the lower parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two sides of the belly, now you must focus your attention and consideration entirely on this so that the part where the wound is lies higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you should administer this for large wounds as well as for medium-sized wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And for small wounds, place what is at hand, and then have the one most skilled among you perform it, who holds the wound entirely in their hand and adjusts the lips of it, and then proceed to suture it from that point to another as needed.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or a quantity of needles according to the extent of the wound; then hold from the end of the dissection with your ring finger, and tighten the needle one, but do not place thread at both ends of the suture, at both ends of the internal part behind the edge of the wound, until you have penetrated that part; and now you have joined both ends of the suture and both ends of the inner part, thus making four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Take a needle and double thread around it, and make several loops on both sides, then bring the two lips together and close the wound decently; then take the thickness of your finger and place another needle in that, and tie that with the same method as you tied the first needle; and do not stop doing this if necessary for the needles until you have completed the entire closure of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be medium between coarseness and fineness, for fine needles pierce the flesh quickly; and coarse ones are difficult to insert into the tissue, so it is desirable that they be medium in both fineness and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not advisable to place the needle at both ends of the wound simultaneously, because the flesh should be pierced quickly and the wound should close before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not extend the stitches too much so that the wound is not hindered from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not bother the patient while sleeping; and place powders spread out around the sutures, which should cover the ends of the needles; and leave them until you know that the wound has already healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And this type of suture using needles is most convenient for small wounds, as it often takes only one or two needles or around that number.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second type of suture is more common: it involves managing the four ends, two from the wound and two from the thread, at once, with a needle that is appropriately wrapped in fineness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	When you have pierced these four extremities with the needle, retract the needle from that midpoint from which you started, so that the thread withdraws to the most superior part of the wound, so that the suture may be a cloth-like suture along which the edges are tightly drawn.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each stitch by the width of the smallest finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known to be for humans.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And in such a suture, I would close the wound of a person who was injured in their abdomen by a knife, where the wound’s disruption was larger than one palm, and it extended around two palms from the stomach area on both sides; and then I would reduce that after the bowel had protruded from the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated within the space of fifteen days or so, and I treated him, and he recovered; and afterwards he walked for some time without difficulty, and returned to his usual activities.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other physicians had judged that he could not be healed; and by miracle fire, for I did not treat him with any medicine or means available in the place where he was, but rather placed a piece of cloth over the wound twice a day and washed it continuously with honey water until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will describe two kinds of suture according to the narration of the Text.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And that is where you begin the suture from the edge, and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus when the needle penetrates into the bone and in that place makes a cut according to straightness and length of the entire body, and leave the extremity of the suture in which you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate into the other extremity the needle from the inner part to the outer part in the other extremity of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that penetration, now make another penetration in that same extremity of the wound from the outer part to the inner part; and leave the extremity of the suture that is in this place, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from the inner part to the outer part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make that penetration such that when you penetrate it into the suture at the extremity of the wound in the part inside, all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then start from this side and bring it to the suture at the extremity on the other side, and withdraw the needle from the bone that penetrates, and then return it to that bone and bring the extremity of the suture that is on the other side to this extremity of the wound; and withdraw it from the bone that is on this side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and then again, and do this one time after another until you sew up everything that is on the outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the essence of this method of suturing is that you sew along the suture of the membranes as you would skin the pelts, so that you sew the suture once from the side of the bone extremity, and leave it on another occasion until you have completed it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Here is the translation:
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Place the needle at the end of the wound closest to you, and make it penetrate inside the wound through one point, then cut off both ends of the thread; and turn the needle around so that it penetrates from outside to inside at both ends of the thread.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then turn each of them around so that they penetrate from inside the wound to outside at both ends of another point on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suturing is better than the common simple suturing, and it is the type of suture for which I have previously mentioned the procedure.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Walia.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And if someone says that the suturing of the abdomen is done with two needles, it means that you insert a thread into each needle and begin by piercing one side according to the suture technique used for stitching together equal sides.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, the suturing there is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the judgment of treatment for wounds is the same as for other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The reason is that when you treat a recent wound with its own blood before the air changes it, and reduce the swelling and sew it properly, then apply powder to it.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply some ingredients that harden and close the wound, and ensure that the thread and needle are sterilized; and subsequently treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If the medicines are not at hand, then wait for a short time, because it begins to gather pus and forms a crust, and changes that twice in the day as you have been taught, until it is healed, so that you do not need other medication when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the wound may communicate to the principal limbs, then cover it with a cloth made of linen soaked in high-quality oil, or in olive oil, and place that over the area between the joints and dress them accordingly.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in the body cavities, since this often happens, then apply styptic black thyme to it, and especially if the putrid matter has reached the cavity and an incision is made penetrating into the depth of it.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that what affects the large cavity is harder to heal than what affects the small cavities.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal when the cavity called “gugun” does not receive healing from a wound that occurs in it; and this is due to the great number of veins within it, its large size, the subtlety of its structure, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what proceeds from the wound is tissue, and you obtain it fresh, reduce it according to your judgment in the same way as you reduce the cavities.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed into the space and has already turned green or black, then when you apply medicine over the area that is discolored, so that blood flows, because there are veins and arteries in the tissue.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Here is the translation:
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the diseases that occur in the bowel.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the bowel and it is small, it is possible to restore it in some people, because I saw one who was afflicted in his abdomen by a lance wound, and the affliction was on the right side of the stomach, and the affliction was old and had formed a fistula, and there was discharge and gas.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I dressed the wound, not being confident in its healing, but sought to stimulate that part which was healthy and where the area had healed.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And when I saw the area already healed, I feared the complications that might arise from this bad event in his abdomen; and none suffered any harm from such an unfortunate accident by moderating their food intake and drink, and soon they were taking baths and exercising as mentioned.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced individuals have said that when there is a small affliction in the bowel, it should be treated in this manner: take ants with large heads; then bring together the two edges of the wound and place one of those ants, whose mouth is open, on the two edges of the wound; therefore, when it bites onto them and tightens its mouth, cut off its head because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another ant next to the first one, and do not stop placing them one after another according to the quantity of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that and close the wound; and let those heads remain attached within the bowel until the bowel is healed; and no harm will come to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	It is possible that the ligature be made with a fine thread which is made from animal gut, because it can pass through a needle; and you take the end of this thin gut thread, make it bare, and then tie it to the end of the ligature material, wrapped around, and then pass that gut into needles and bind it to the ligature, and reduce it at the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suturing with maggots is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the fine vessels, then at that time there can be only a slight healing, and not complete recovery.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that every wound and abscess when it becomes old and chronic, and forms an ulcer, and is not consolidated and continues to discharge over time without being excised, whether in any part of the body, is generally called a fistula, and we refer to it as such an abscess.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And truly, a fistula is a soft, hard, white swelling in which there is no pain, but rather itching as with the itching of bird pox; and for this reason it is called a feathered sore, that is, an itch.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some people, it is moist, which discharges fluid; and in many cases, this moisture can be excised within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And at times this moisture is thick, and it is scanty, and it is coarse, and it is fine.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	This has been said in the division when I discuss wounds, that every ulcer which is not healed and is not on bare flesh, is such only for one of these causes: of which one is either due to weakness of blood in the body; or due to malice of the ulcer itself; or because between it and the lips there is tough skin preventing the generation of flesh; or because it is a hard swelling; or because that ulcer in itself is putrid, and the matter sent to it is of poor quality; or because medicine is inappropriate for its cure; or when corruption has set in the region, and there is pestilence; or due to the nature of the place, as in Saragossa, where diseases are hard to digest, and the healing of an abscess is naturally delayed; or because there is bone within it, or bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have shown all those causes, the signs of them, and their cure with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is necessary for me to tell you about the treatment of fistulas, which is performed through surgery with my hands.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body; for among them are fistulas that extend to large veins and arteries, or to nerves, or to the brain, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the compound joints composed in such a way as those of the hand and foot; and among them are those that reach near the main member and are similar.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore, among these fistulas that follow this manner, they are among the diseases difficult to heal, and do not respond to treatment, and dealing with them requires labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if any of the fistulas has a depth that cannot be reached by the places mentioned above and you hope for and trust in its cure and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula follows a straight path, investigate it with this.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	And if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of fine lead, for the lightness of lead's nature causes it to float and bend around the tortuosity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has openings that are horrifying, it is not within your power to signify upon them with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then irrigate the openings through those openings, for the moisture with which you irrigate that one will go to the other openings and flow from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire very carefully according to the method by which you can know whether here there is a bone or nerve, and whether the depth of the fistula is distant or near, or if it is a fistula with multiple openings that lies above all within your strength, within your examination, within which you examine the malady, and the cause of the pain lies beneath your compression upon the place, and similar signs and accidental causes related to an abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood upon all those causes with true station, then proceed to the cure according to confidence: and that is that you now consider whether it is a fistula that is apparent nearby or in a salt place, distant from a joint, or of a nerve, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the places which I have told you about.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Now you dry the fistula according to what was said before about its description, and remove what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what has grown in the opening of the flesh or of similar nature, and treat it until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of great depth and runs straight, it is necessary to incise that as far inward as you are able, and then remove all corrupted flesh from it; and then apply bandages wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have probed with a probe.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this several times so that the sharp medicine may dissolve all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then treat it with applications that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it does not heal with that, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must ascertain this, then you should probe it and dry it as we have recommended, unless you prohibit any cause involving a vein or nerve or principal limb as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed to you and there is any corruption or blackness on it, then you should scrape that away until all the corruption is removed; and then treat it with substances that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it does not heal and pus continues to flow as before, then you will know that you have not reached complete eradication of the corruption; and then you should uncover it again and carefully examine and clean it with the utmost care, and then treat it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it heals, that is good; but if not, then you will know that the corruption is in the deep recesses of the body, which you have not reached, and thus in that case you should only dress the wound.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, it is possible for you to extract that, then you extract it with subtle forceps which are suitable for that.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all of those, and do not leave any of them due to your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if any cause of the humidity opposes you, and in their incision there is neither fear nor error, then incise those ligaments or muscles as necessary, and release the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if it is not the right time for you to remove the bones at that moment, then apply what can alleviate the condition to the wound, and leave it as it is until such a time when there is flesh and ligaments around those bones, and protect the wound so that it does not become hardened, and ensure that the section which you have incised in your operation remains uninhibited.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having said that, if you are concerned, apply to the wound a cloth submerged in hot oil or a cloth submerged in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments, because when those ligaments will heal, and the bones are separated from each other by ablation, and their adhesion is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone such as the bone of a camel or cow or similar, and what is corrupted of it is only its surface, then scrape that away with a rasp only until the corruption and blackness are removed, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if what is corrupted of it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area and completely excise it where the corruption has spread, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	Here is what is recommended to you concerning what happens when you attend to a person in their condition so that you may use it as an example and assistance for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man around xxx years old came to me with pain in his abdomen. The discomfort is located internally within the body, and the material causing this has reached the abdominal area, forming a large abscess, and it does not appear to be due to an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	Then time was wasted due to the error of the physicians when the abscess became inflamed, and pus formed within it. The patient's treatment was delayed until an opening for a fistula had to be made, through which all the foul matter and moisture from the body were discharged.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	Then many doctors attended to the patient for two years, and none of them had knowledge or skill in the art until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	I saw the opening that had formed and the matter flowing from those openings in great quantity; and already the patient's body was entirely weakened, and his complexion was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	Then I inserted a probe into one of those openings and the probe reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then I promptly examined all the openings and found that they extended from all parts of the opening.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	Then I decided to incise one of the openings and exposed part of the bone, finding it corrupted; it was already turning to dust and was blackened and decayed. Part of the abscess had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And I used what was shown and prepared from the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I recognized that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I had already eradicated and treated.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I paused the restoration of the wound with healing medicines for a long time, and it did not heal.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I reopened and exposed the bone secondarily over the initial exposure, and found continuing corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I treated what appeared from that corruption, and then I attempted to perform the cure and restoration, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered another way and did not stop excising the bone bit by bit specifically, and attempted to restore it, but it was not restored until I excised around one palm's width of it, along with its medulla, and then restored that part with medicines, and it healed quickly and became healthy.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to repeat the operation and cutting of it except for the condition of its inflammation and for its poor tolerance and fear of death, because it suffered at all times due to excess of syncope evacuation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus it healed completely, and there is no flesh instead of the bone; and its condition in its body has improved, and its function has returned; and it has resumed its normal activities without any contrary effects during movement or injury.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if it is an elevated bone in a place where the body has already been treated, then you should proceed as follows: take a thread and tie it at the end of that prominent bone, and instruct someone to extend it; pause tying this thicker thread after the first one; then apply the thread over the flesh near the bone, and stretch the extremity so that you pull the flesh away from the sides, thus exposing the skin where you want to suture so that the stitches do not damage the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	Place a cloth or towel beneath the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not prohibited to saw through the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	You should saw over the slightly corrupted area bit by bit, because if the corruption is in the concavity of the bone and does not appear on its surface, then you must saw from the other side.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted but not prominent, and one part continues with the other, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then you must expose the flesh from all sides; then place a cloth beneath, and saw off the first part where the corruption is until the sawing of the other part is continuous.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the sawing be according to the location of the corruption slightly, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw off the bone where it continues from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in proportion but originates elsewhere.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is difficult; however, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you, and expose that area, and clean it according to each possible disposition, and correct each origin as best you can, without coming into conflict with veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you must know which incision tools and saws to use for these bones, as they vary according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, their fineness and size, their hardness and rarity; therefore, it is necessary that you prepare appropriate instruments for each type of operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that this operation signifies to you according to the kind of instrument of which you need; when you are great in study and long and knowledge of the methods of this art, and witness of methods of diseases, now you have them yourself with what is suitable for the instruments for every disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I say to you forming at the end of this chapter the number of the instruments which you will place as simples among which you will proceed with your prohibition, which you will experiment upon the others.
Forma de serra:	Form of a saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of a rasp:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this rasp be in the form of the head of a star-shaped key, and the points of it be in the form of the points of a needle.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not suitable unless you rub the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is large and wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of a larger razor than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another well-made saw: let it be made with a sturdy bow and the sharpness of iron, and the handle of wood well-made.
Forma de lu:	Shape of the liver:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	 Shape of the razor, which has a curvature:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	 Shape of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	 Shape of another razor with a curved tip:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	 Shape of small razors resembling a tenta:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	 Shape of the cutter used to cut bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	 Shape of another smaller cutter:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	 Shape of another cutter; this resembles a rod, and its tip is like pincers, and it is exhibited in various places according to the ratio of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	 Shape of a rod that is appropriate in proportion to what is being pierced through the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	 And its tip is triangular and sharp:
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	 And it is made of Indian steel, and similarly, it is appropriate for all the purposes we have mentioned regarding razors, cutters, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	For cutting edges and锯骨的切割：
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities may become diseased either from an intrinsic or extrinsic cause. If you treat that corruption with the cure of those medicines and the cure does not take effect, sometimes the corruption will leave the member which is not being affected by any cause; then it must be that you incise that member into where the corruption approaches, so that the patient may escape from that death or harm which is a greater evil than the loss of the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that which affects him is that the member becomes blackened as if it were burnt by fire, or it may approach the corruption such that the putrefaction enters into that member and spreads throughout his body. Therefore, you must proceed with incision at that point.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, it is the cause of the corruption due to the bite or sting of certain venomous creatures such as a scorpion, viper, or Russell's viper and the like.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the bite is on the extremity of a finger, then you must incise the finger and not allow the corruption to spread into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if it affects the hand, then you must incise at the joint of the wrist and not allow the corruption to spread into the elbow joint of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if it spreads further, then you must incise the arm at the shoulder joint in its junction.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes beyond that and reaches around the shoulder, then it is death for the patient; and to administer any other cause for this cure depends on the amount of efficacy.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And so it seems with the foot when corruption invades the said foot, then you incise it into one of the nodes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes hold in the sole of the foot, then you incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it penetrates to the bone, then you incise the swelling into the joint of the bone.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already reached the bone, then there is no remedy but dismissal, and leaving the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of incising the member or of tying it is that you bind a ligature below the part where you wish to incise, and bind another ligature above the site; and extend the assistant one ligature below, and have the assistant extend another ligature above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligatures by about a span so that all the flesh is exposed; and then it is incised or tied.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it is necessary that a piece of cloth be placed around all parts so that it does not touch the affected area, and that the patient receive appropriate treatment for abscesses.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if blood flows when you are working, then you should cauterize the area immediately, or apply some powders to staunch the blood; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the affected member with bandages at the appropriate places, and care for it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you what happened to a man in his foot, the incident which I and you have recommended, which is that this accident turned black in his foot with discoloration similar to combustion by fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	From that corruption arising first in its place inside, it tends to affect all the body.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that person prepares himself by applying poultices more than ten days before the healing of the member is hindered by the vehemence of what causes intense pain and burning, and incision is made in that part at the joint, and the heat subsides.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time ago this kind of corruption occurred in the finger of the hand according to that method.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it comes to me, and so I perforate to expel that excess through what I apply on the hand with medicines, near the purification of the body from it; and the excess is not expelled and begins to go to another finger before going out of the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asked me to incise the hand from it, but I did not want to do that, hoping for the expulsion of that excess, and rather feared that the incision of the hand might lead to death, because the power of the disease was very strong.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And after he departed from me, he returned to his homeland and it was reported to me that the man prepared himself and had his entire hand incised, and he recovered.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have added this narrative only so that it may be assistance regarding the nature of this disease, and to indicate its significance according to which it is described and acted upon.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Regarding the treatment of the sinuses and the quality of enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged inside, forming a collection of pus, and then it breaks and is perforated, allowing the pus to drain out, leaving the area empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin above it remains thin like cloth, without reaching advanced corruption, and does not affect the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged within so that corruption takes hold in some member, it is then called a fistula and not a carbuncle.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for this is to incise that wound entirely as it revolves, and especially when it has become thin like cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	However, if you hope that the wound will adhere and that the corruption has not yet reached its final stage, and there is pus present in the wound, then your treatment should include enemas.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you must consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that you are treating has a foul odor, then administer an enema with Egyptian medicine consisting of oil, vinegar, and raisins in equal parts, mixed together until the medicine becomes thick like honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; administer the mixture as an enema to the sinus, plug the opening of the wound, and leave the medicine inside for the duration of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then remove that medicine after its use; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the odor is eliminated.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes an enema is given with ash water when you do not have this medicine available; take the ashes of wheat, put them in water; then strain it and administer the enema with it until you are confident that the sinus is cleaned.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then administer an enema with honey and water mixed with raisins three times; also give an enema with vinegar and honey mixed, as honey has cleansing properties and vinegar helps the sinus to adhere, especially when the vinegar is rich in astringency and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have washed certain areas and convince yourself that the sinus is already cleaned out, then wash it with water that helps new flesh to grow.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take a decoction of myrtle and dissolve it in rose oil and vinegar; or wash it with certain medicines and other decoctions which have the properties already written about in the chapter on decoctions.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and does not admit the nozzle of the syringe, then gradually enlarge it with a small instrument, and place cotton soaked in Egyptian decoction or basilicon decoction inside until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly, if the opening is too wide, then sew together the edges with stitches and leave them in such a way that they do not interfere with the insertion of the syringe.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening from which the pus flows is raised to the upper parts, then dry it in the lower part where the pus can flow downward, for when the arm is constricted at the depth of the sinus, flesh will be generated there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus near the lower bone as you wish, then make an opening so that the limb can be prepared in such a way that the pus flows freely according to your arrangement and without any hindrance to the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that should be applied to the sinus appropriately, spreading them over a piece of cloth as you wish.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such quantity as to cover the entire sinus; then, using scissors, make an incision along the right of the sinus opening that is somewhat wider than the opening itself; then spread another piece of cloth with strong decoctions according to the size of the cut, and place it far from the sinus opening so that the pus can flow easily without obstructing the larger cloth until a few days later you can place it closer.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	Move the one who is above the opening of the sinus, which you should drain at all times so that what is inside the arm exits.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know whether what flows from the arm is thin or thick, or is undigested or not undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And for this you should consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and whether it is in an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter placed over the opening of the sinus has adhered or is about to adhere, then you should loosen it or change it every third day. When you loosen the dressing, then change the cloth for another one and renew the application.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if from the sinus there is space for subtle pus, then do not despair of its adhesion, because healing will soon follow. For some people in whom flesh generation in their wounds takes a long time, and others in whom the opposite occurs.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if from the sinus for several days there is undigested matter coming out of the arm, then you know that the sinus will not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and becomes prolonged, then adjust to a drying effect of the medicines. If the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they should be dried as well when applied, especially when there is an excess of moisture to be removed.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the most important thing for curing is to take a powder and dissolve it in rose oil, and mix it with another ointment that has been previously prepared in its substance, and apply it to the area as needed.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	In that situation, when there is no bandage available, find a piece of cloth and honey; if the honey has been boiled to thicken it, use that. Or take myrrh, aloes, and mastic, grind them all together, sprinkle the powder over honey which is on the fire, and pour this mixture onto a cloth and stretch it over the wound; and pour the thickened honey with the powder into the wound and sprinkle some of it on a cloth and apply that to the wound.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	In some cases, administer with the juice of longleaf aristle and root of celestial lily (and it is a celestial lily) and flour of iris and centaury, and use those simple substances or mixtures, grind them together, sieve them, sprinkle the powder over the honey which has been recommended; and use that.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the wound has become prolonged and is not healed by this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in its root, and it affects the bones or other hard parts of the body or the ligaments; now treat it with a fistula cure, as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	On the treatment of blisters and worn nails, and the cutting of an additional finger and division.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	A blister is an abscess that arises under the nail of a toe or finger of the hand or foot, and it can also occur in other fingers. When prolonged, its treatment is less valued, or it is an abscess from a cautery burn, or it becomes corrupted, and it secretes pus that corrodes the nail root, often corrupting the entire nail, and sometimes spreading corruption to the bone, causing a foul odor, and making the extremity of the finger or toe darkened in color.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	Therefore, when you have applied the treatment as we have said in the division and do not complete your cure, then it is necessary that you incise with iron all the superfluous flesh that remains from the nail and immediately cauterize the wound near there, for cauterization is helpful in this.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and the nail is healthy, and the addictions of the nail have already drawn the flesh inward, and begin to pinch and irritate that area, then you should place a thin blade below the angle of the nail that pinches the flesh, and lift it up and incise that flesh easily, and apply upon what remains of the flesh corrosive medicines until it is completely removed; and then cure that with remedies until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already penetrated into the bone, then it is necessary that you incise the bone there and extract it, for it is never healed when the bone is corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading to the finger, then you should incise it at one of the joints according to where the inflammation is located, and then treat it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if there is a bruise or inflammation under the nail, and there is severe pain in that area, then at the beginning you should bleed the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatum in a transverse section from top to bottom, and be careful that the section does not penetrate into the flesh beneath the nail, for you will cause severe pain to the patient, and it will lead to the formation of excessive tightened tissue in that place; and then treat that area with something that relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	This may be adjusted, which is natural in most people: it is thin and fleshy there, or thin and hollow where the bones are, or it is thin at the nails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birthplace of the one in question is in some of the bones of the said joints.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But the one that is born in some of the bones of the finger does not suffer much, and the one that is thin at the joints suffers greatly.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are born fleshy, the section is easy, and you should cut it where its root is with a broad scalpel.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But for the one that is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, be careful not to cut it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But in the one that is born between the bones, it is necessary to cut into the flesh of its beginning with a round scalpel down to the bone, and then use one of the appropriate saws, and afterward treat what is inside until it heals.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But for consolidation that occurs between the bones either by their movement or due to the birth of the person in such a state, or due to healing from an injury or burning by fire, or similarly, then it is necessary to cut this consolidation until the said parts return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between the flaps of the wound in oiled linen so that they do not heal too quickly, and separate them, or place a thin sheet of lead between them until it is necessary for them to be healed as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And so it seems that consolidation occurs in some of the said bones in the palm. At that time, you should dry out that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suits the figure of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of the formation of veins, these are their types.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins are of these types, and there are veins wrapped thickly, full of melancholic superfluities that move through the limbs of the body, and their primary occurrence is in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers, workers, and those who carry loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then it is necessary that you administer purgation of the body from black bile several times for strong expulsion, and subsequently bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment for them with iron is according to two methods: one is that they are incised and the black blood is drawn out, and the other method is that the vein is raised and completely extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The sectioning of it is according to this method: bandage the leg with hot water for a time until the thick blood becomes resolved, which is sediment in the leg, and then strain the patient's leg at the most prominent part of the swelling below the knee with a cloth, and then dry the vein in one place, or two, or three with wide sectioning, and then extract the black blood with the right hand from below the bandaged part upwards through it until the quantity of blood is drawn out that you want and that suffices for the patient's endurance and tolerance.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then dress that area, and command the patient to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And then comes the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and at that night for the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of the limb is done in this manner: you shave the area of the patient's body where hair is present, and then place them in a bath or wrap the affected part in hot water until it turns red and the veins are distended; or if a bath is not available, have the limb exercised vigorously until it becomes heated.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the bandage on the side of the vein by section either at the front or where the finger is, or lower down where the heel is.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then apply the bandage with hooks and expose the vein from all sides until it becomes apparent, and you should notice its appearance as it turns to a darker shade.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And thus when you expose it, from the bandage you should see that white one which is a cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then place the ligature below that white one so that it is elevated and suspended from the bandage, and suspend it with hooks like a lion's claw.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then make another section near that section for three fingers' width, and then expose the bandage from above the vein until it becomes apparent.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then elevate that one and incise it at the rear section near the heel, and then extract it and raise it until it comes out through the second section, and then extract it from the section above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract it from the section that is highest or furthest from all the sections, until it is completely out; and then incise it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if he does not obey to have it extracted and raised, then insert a strong double-pointed needle with thread and extract it, or insert below the nail and rotate your hand in all directions until it is expelled.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it becomes difficult to raise that part and it has become troublesome for the patient because of this injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when you have completely removed it, then place on the site of the wound wool submerged in wine and rose oil and non-rose oil, and care for it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vessel is contracted having twists to which there is an envelope in the parts, and it is not straight as we have said, then you should cut along each part of the twist and at the places of its envelope, and then lift it with hooks until you raise it completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful in your section that you do not cut the vein and that you do not injure it, for it will be difficult for you to raise it; use your prudence in this.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Shape of the instrument with which the vessel is cut:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of hooked instrument:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not sharpened like hooks nor does it have a sharp tip so as not to injure the vein; and it is made of thick flexibility, like leather, because if it were thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; however, it should be unnecessarily thick as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	On the extraction of the leg vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the camels in hot lands, just as in Africa and in the hot and dry lands of India with little vegetation and where no grass or crops grow.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And this vein is generated in other parts of the body apart from the camels.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its gestation is from putrefaction that occurs below the skin, just as venom develops inside the bodies of snakes and worms, generating between the skin and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the occurrence of this condition is that this vein causes inflammation in the camel; and near the location, it becomes vesiculated; and soon the vein begins to emerge from the place of that vesication, which seems like a plant rash.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the extremity of it appears, then you should wrap around it a piece of lead weighing one drachma within two drachmas, and attach that to the camel and let the lead hang from it.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And each time it happens that any cause affects the parts outside, wrap it with lead and attach that to it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is prolonged, then you should incise a part of it and wrap the remainder; do not incise that which appears like a rash until it has come out, for if you incise it while it is contracted, it will go into the flesh and cause an abscess, pus formation in the area, and a bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Therefore, it should be treated gently and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the rear of it, so that no cause remains in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein it is issued in some men who are in its length of five palms and it has come to me that one reached twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised at the time of its treatment, introduce the blade into the tract and perforate so that everything contained in the material is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the area with medicines for several days; then treat it according to the cure for abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and it emerges from several openings, and is branched from each opening.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And thus treat it as we have said in the division and according to what is mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	On the section concerning worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is called in some lands bovine disease because often among cattle there is a worm of which one is born between the skin and the flesh, and it moves throughout the body up and down, and it shows itself through the sensation beyond its animated movement from member to member until it breaks the skin and goes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of it is by putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, and larvae and ascarids occur in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared because of its mischief, for when it moves in the body and rises to the head, and reaches the brain, then it easily enters and destroys the brain, and this happens sometimes.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	Then when you wish to treat that and extract it, at that time it is not done except by means of the sling movement and appearance of it to the sense, and then you should tighten what is above it and what is below it with bandages and constriction, and immediately dry over it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, then pause and cauterize with fire above the place where it is, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it by which the place is also corrupted as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you see that it has reached near the eye, then tighten above the eyebrow with strong constriction, and immediately dry over it, and extract that; and it is necessary for the patient to use cleansing of their body with medicines evacuating foul humors, and guard against foods generating putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On the treatment of nasal afflictions.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called "nafir" in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in certain limbs, and then it changes from one limb to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that as I will now tell you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and uncovering her arm, I saw a small inflammation in the funis vein of the arm, and after resting for an hour, I saw that inflammation spreading as if it were wax moving from one place to another, but more quickly than could be expected, like living silver flowing from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain moved from that location to the muscle, and it remained there for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And with this, it reaches in the other body until it enters the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then it retreated to me, spinning throughout the entire body as I saw; and I was greatly amazed by the permutation of its movement and the speed from one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this before in my eyes according to that manner, but I have now seen words which show pain being transferred from one member to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see this in my eyes as I did in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think this was possible except that the woman was of a different nature, one of dry bodies and exposed veins, and in this way she exhibited the sensation of the air being transferred.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this does not appear according to this retro-action in those who are delicate and soft, with moist bodies and hidden veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to treat it, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears in the eye as we have said, then you should press firmly on that area and quickly direct your treatment into where that trapped air has come out, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it in your eyes, then you should treat that by inducing the body to expel wind and air, and apply ointments for foul-smelling pills and for senna and similar remedies.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are varied according to their types, and according to the parts of the body where they strike, as their diversity includes those with large tips, small tips, concave tips, blunt tips, solid ones; and those with three angles, and those that have tongues; and those that are shafts.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	Of that which is second concerning the members and the places in which the wound occurs there are two ways: for the members or main members cause such things as the brain, heart, liver, spine, lungs, ribs, bowels, bladder, and those like them; and so when you find a wound in any of these members and it appears to you with signs of death, which I will recount shortly, then you must avoid extracting that arrow from there because death seizes that one in the major dispositions, and when no such bad signs appear to you and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then you extract that one and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	Of the signs of the brain when an arrow strikes it and penetrates the bone, and exits at the vertex which is above the brain, there occur severe headaches, scotoma (partial loss of vision), vertigo, stiffness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms, confusion and vomiting of bile, and very quickly speech is cut off and the voice is destroyed. From the wound site comes a white moist substance like flour, and the face appears to have an abundance of moisture.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And so if these signs appear to you, then you must abstain from treatment and the extraction of the arrow unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the signs of the arrow when it strikes the heart, which is near the left breast, are such that one can tell whether it has penetrated a hard or soft area; and very quickly the movement of the arrow is like the pulse movement, and blood from the wound is black, and coldness seizes the extremities, and cold sweat appears; therefore you will know that death descends soon.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	Here are the signs when the arrow has struck the lung: bloody frothy fluid flows from the wound, and the veins near the neck become swollen, and the patient's color changes, and they breathe out great sighs, and seek fresh air eagerly.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow hits the membrane in the groin area, and the pain is near the small ribs, and it causes great and violent pain and sighing, and there is no movement at all of the limbs' muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow hits the stomach, then immediately after the wound is inflicted, any undigested food causes great pain.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow hits the abdomen and is embedded in it, causing some tear of the wound, or the membrane, or intestine which is ruptured, then there is no hope for recovery from the extraction of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow hits the bladder and urine comes out, and it causes some damage to the parts outside, and immediately there is great pain over the patient, then you know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But the other limbs as well as the face, the neck, and the jaw, and the shoulders and the arm pits, and the vertebrae of the back, and the clavicle, and the chest and similar parts of the limbs, are saved according to the best practices when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recount this to you as I have seen regarding the nature of these arrows, so that it may be significant for your own treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that when an arrow struck a man in the lacrimal bone at the root of his nose, I extracted it from the other side, leaving behind only the gray matter of his ear, and he healed without any injury to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	From extracting another arrow from a Jew’s eye, the case being that the arrowhead was embedded in his eyeball, after lifting the eyelid up and down, and the arrowhead was hidden and could not be reached except for a small part to which it adhered with its shaft, and it was a large sharp arrow of those used by the Turks, armed with a lion’s tooth in which there were no barbs.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	The senator was the Jew, and no harm came to his eye despite the accident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	From extracting another arrow from a Christian man, which was embedded in his throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, the kind that has barbs; then I incised around it between two fingers, and it was submerged in his throat; then I carefully worked on it, and promptly removed it, and the Christian man recovered.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	From extracting another arrow from a man’s abdomen, which he was thought to die from; and thus, after passing xxx days without any change in his condition due to its effects, I incised around the arrow and acted upon it, and he recovered, and no harm came to him despite the accident.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow was embedded between his two shoulder blades, and the wound had healed over it, and after seven years had passed, I extracted the arrow from its place.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow was embedded in her abdomen, and the wound had healed over it, and there was no change in her condition as a result, and the woman did not suffer any harm from any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow was embedded in his face, and the wound had healed over it, and he broke the arrow without feeling any pain, and many similar cases were like this.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	About extracting the arrow from the man of the king's chief who was wounded in the middle part of his nose, and it had already deviated slightly towards the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And he was called for the treatment of him after the embedding of the arrow within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then I discovered the track of the arrow as narrow; then I examined it carefully, and did not feel it there; but he felt a pain just below his right ear, and then I presumed that this pain was from the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	Then I applied a plaster to the place that has attracting and digestive properties, hoping that it would cause an abscess so that the location of the arrowhead would appear to me from there.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And no significant incident occurred at the site that would indicate that the arrow had reached that location; and I continued to apply the plaster for several days without any incident occurring. Meanwhile, the wound healed, and on one day after about three weeks, I felt the arrow inside his nose and reported this to him.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Then I applied corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it softened, and upon examination with a probe, I discovered the tip of the arrow slightly adhering to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Then I continued to open the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow became visible to me, and it took me about four months to reach this point.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	Then when the wound had softened further and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it and remove it, but I did not succeed at that time. Therefore, I continued to carefully consider and devise ways to extract it, until one day I began to use specially made forceps in a manner described later in this chapter, which allowed me to extract it; and then I treated the wound accordingly.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some surgeons judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and I have restored it, and the wound has been consolidated, and the patient is healed entirely, and there was no need for anything else.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows so that you apply this rule and significance to what I have not mentioned, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not comprehensible in narration nor do I comprehend those from the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise craftsmen compare with few words; and with what is present about what is absent; and when new operations and new instruments are developed, they should explore the causes of such innovations in the art.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not removed from the members in which they are placed except in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they enter; or by the opposite part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is removed by the place where it enters, or is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy location and is drawn out.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not observe the time at which you catch it, sometimes it is better that you leave it for several days until the flesh around it heals and reduces the attraction of it and its exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is placed in bone and you do not observe the proper method, then leave it for several days and gently move it according to its attraction each day, and it will be removed.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not observe the proper method for several days, then it is necessary that you perforate around the arrow in that bone gently with a thin awl until the space around the arrow is enlarged, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is embedded in the bone of the head and has penetrated into one of the ventricles of the brain, and you notice any of those symptoms which I have mentioned, then refrain from extracting the arrow and leave it inside until its natural state becomes apparent after some days; for if it reaches the heart, at that moment death will not be delayed.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is embedded only in the bone and does not penetrate into the heart, and the patient remains stable for several days without any of those mentioned symptoms occurring, then you should proceed with the extraction of the arrow and do so carefully.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is firmly embedded and you do not proceed with its extraction, then you should administer treatments around the arrow as we have recommended, and take care of the area until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is hidden in the part of the body and is out of reach, then you should probe around there, and if you feel it, then grasp it with some instruments that are suitable for its extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the shaft, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein here, then enlarge the wound until it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you have instruments with which to do so, then remove the flesh in which it is embedded entirely with all the skill that you can muster; and proceed with this, if you cannot avoid cutting through the flesh over a fracture of the bones or twisting them until you are able to do so.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you perform the extraction of the arrow at any place, then you use both a twist with your hand and forceps to all parts so that it obeys; and delicately with great delicacy that the arrow is not broken and that it is made difficult for you and its extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do this at that time, then leave it for several days until the parts around it become less swollen, and then try again when the situation has improved.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if there is contrary blood flow, then you administer what we have said about the treatment in the respective chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your virtue in the incision of veins or nerves, or cord, and administer care in every possible way to avoid the arrow; and do this with ease, tranquility, slowness, and firmness as I and you recommend.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And thus when you make the arrow contract so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you should determine the removal of the arrow, for it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But arrows that are ejected in the opposite direction from another part, or if you have already moved some part towards the external parts, or if the extremity of the arrow causes hardness due to the flesh above the shoulder blade and lifts it up; then you should cut on that point; and let the section be according to the amount at which the forceps take hold; and then pull it out, for it is made light by this method.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is held in the bone, then turn it so that the arrow presses into the bone, and widen it thus, and then extract that.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it there for several days, and then attempt to extract it when the flesh has healed.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is there, then push it out from there.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft is broken and you want to apply force, then insert and push it, if it is blunt, use a hollow instrument so that it fits between the curvature of it and the arrowhead, and then push it out from there.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the arrow is curved, then push it out with a strong instrument by inserting it, for the arrow will be dislodged by this.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then make sure to cut away all the flesh in which it is embedded, if that is possible for you, and then treat it as is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow strikes in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side, and is near such that you touch it with your hand, and it is possible to cut around it, then cut around it and guard against injuring any vein or nerve, and extract it, and then treat the wound as is necessary, and cure it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps with which arrows are pulled:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the ends of these be shaped like the beak of a bird, which acts as a clamp when they grasp the arrow so that it does not slip.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	Of those are made various types of incisions, large, few and medium-sized, according to the quantity of the arrow's size and the scarcity of the sinew, and the breadth of the wound, and the constriction of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The shape of the concave part of this extremity is curved like an eagle's claw so that the instrument of the arrow may be guided in it, and the impulse of that blunt end.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape of the pushing part of the blunt extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	like a rod so that the instrument may be guided into the concave arrow and is pushed by it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	On the incision of veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for phlebotomy of which it is customary to perform phlebotomy at xxx points, of which sixteen are in the head: two pulsating veins which are near the ears, called alhasisain; two veins that appear on each temple; and two veins that are in the two tear ducts, called aspicientz; one vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vein at the tip of the nose; two veins that are on the neck; two veins that are on the upper lip; and two veins that are on the lower lip; these are called algelic veins; and there are two veins below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The veins that are phlebotomized in the arms total five. Among them is one cephalic vein, which they call "the vein of the head"; it is a small vein and is composed of a branch from the basilic vein and another branch from the cephalic vein; they name this one "the vein of the whole body." The basilic vein is placed on the domestic arm and is called "citillar," and the common people call it "the vein of the abdomen"; the brachial vein, which is situated over the elbow, is the one that is phlebotomized, and it appears above the wrist with clear manifestation; and the salvatella vein, which is located between the little finger and the ring finger, and this one branches into two parts.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the thigh and the groin there are three veins; one of them is that which is behind the curvature of the horn of the wild goat; and the second is sophena, and its place is behind the groin of the domestic animal; and the sciatic vein, and its place is behind the groin of the wild goat; and in the groin there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The treatment of the veins that are near the ears is for catarrhs, chronic diseases, purgatives, and old ulcers of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those veins is as I recommend to you: it should be done at the top of the patient's head, and the patient's head should be rubbed in the occipital area where both veins are, using a large cloth with good friction; then hold the patient's hair tightly with a bandage so that the two veins appear near their respective ears in two places on the back of the head; and search for those veins with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your finger, here is where to attempt the bleeding.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the lancet, and it should be sharp, and then insert it behind the vein into the tendon until the blood flows to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then raise your hand with the vein and the tendon upwards and cut the vein with a sharp incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be the quantity of two fingers fitted together or around that amount; and let as much blood out as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then apply pressure with a poultice and leave it there until it heals.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And there is mentioned at the beginning of the book the incision and also their cautery.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But the two veins, arteries that are for the practitioners of phlebotomy are to remove ancient and sudden evil and continuous ophthalmia and swelling from acute excesses poured into the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those veins is as I recommend to you: have the patient sit and place your hand under their arm so that the two veins appear clearly by sight, and feel for their pulse below with your fingers; then you may proceed to attempt it.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then raise the tourniquet above the vein toward the upper part with your indicated finger, and insert the phlebotomy instrument below, and lift the vein up; and cut it as you have done with the other two veins; let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then loosen the patient’s restraint, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, and then place it on the wound and powder it and tightly bandage it above with strong compression, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And there is mentioned the recall of them, and of those the incision, and the attraction at the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus the practice of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is appropriate for phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient diseases of the face and to alleviate headache, stiffness, and foul-smelling ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of phlebotomy on it is as I recommend to you; that is, the patient should hold their arm with a cloth so that the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called a lancet, whose form is as follows:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the punctures at the point which is at the head of the furrow above that vein, and strike it with a slant or for some other reason in that manner, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; and then untie the patient's perforation and apply something inside until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And in some cases it is necessary to use a flebotomy lancet, but it does not need to be sharp like other lancets; rather, it should have a blunt tip, and cut across that area since the bone is close to the surface and would easily break if the flebotomy were too fine.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	May the treatment of the two veins near the tear ducts of both eyes be for treating itchy eyes due to force and grease in the eyes, and also for illnesses of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the flebotomy is that the patient should hold their arm with a bandage, and then perform the flebotomy on them, while you stand above their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the flebotomy should be performed across the length a little to one side with a lancet, a little less in that location since there is no flesh; and if the lancet is sharp, the tip could easily break.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and pause on those points, and tie those areas for one night, and then untie them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	And the flebotomy of the vein of the nose is appropriate for acute fever and violent headache, and for illnesses of the face and migraine and pain that occurs in the face, especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient strains his neck and approaches it to his nose with your left hand, and take the lancet sharp long and fix it in the middle place of the tip of the nose according to straightness, for the vein does not appear to the sense here, and for the blood begins to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Push your hand with the small phlebotomy little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; and then leave it for one night, for it is quickly restored.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	But the harm of phlebotomy on the two veins leads to constriction and the beginning of leprosy and many illnesses and impetigo and bad corrosive ulcers as well as herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the phlebotomy on those is that the patient strains each one below his neck with a bandage; and the surgeon stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then phlebotomize the vein with a long lancet slightly at a time; and then extract blood according to season, quantity, or according to what you find necessary for that; and then do the same for the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then loosen the bandage and compress both veins moderately with a pad so that the patient is not overstrained, and leave it for the night as the plague is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the harm of phlebotomy on thick veins concerns small abscesses and pimples in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers and cracks, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and its surroundings.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	Of the quality of the phlebotomy is that you face the patient before you, and strengthen his neck with a bandage, and then unfold the lips of him and look at two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of both, and this more so because in the circuit of those small veins there are black ones; and then incise each with an incision of incising.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If doubt is before you and you do not know which one it is, then you should make an incision in the larger of those, and from the most apparent of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the appearance of the two veins that are in the upper lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	However, it is more common to incise both veins that are in the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	However, the two veins that are below are more helpful for phlebotomy of the cephalic vein in preference to those in the throat, and for diseases of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomy of those is that you place the patient between your hands facing towards the sun, and raise his tongue, and look below the tongue, on one side a vein and on the other side a vein, and the color of each tends to blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then phlebotomize each one; and be careful not to use too much force in phlebotomizing those, for behind those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are phlebotomized in the bend are usually common to all men, and the phlebotomy of theirs is done according to two methods, either apply to the phlebotomy a small mirror or an olive branch with subtlety inclined; or use a fleam for phlebotomy and feel if it bleeds, and this is the form of it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this is what is suitable for sectioning and of those particular ligatures and subtleties according to the width of the veins and according to the constriction of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Method of millet-sized veinotomy:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Tie the ligatures in the same way as described, and it is suitable to open concave full veins with obvious thick roots, and those that contain thick coagulated blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the method of olive-sized veinotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this veinotomy is of lesser width and has a more subtle extremity, and it is suitable for veinotomy of fine veins that contain thin blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Moreover, the benefit of veinotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: for it extracts blood from diseases that affect the lower abdomen and the groin, and from what affects the legs and the belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is suitable for the phlebotomist, when performing veinotomy on that vein, to be very careful with it and to have great fear of it, because near it there is an artery. If he makes a mistake and hits the artery during the puncture of the veinotomy, he will cut that artery and cause a flood of blood. Therefore, one should not perform phlebotomy on that with a sharp instrument but rather should section it as with scissors.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear clearly by obvious inspection, then you should leave that one and switch to another, or search for some branch of it; or perform phlebotomy at the end of the arm where it is clear, and section that with a scissors-like phlebotomy as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you want the phlebotomy of the middle vein, then place your hand above the constriction of the arm where you touch the place between the wrists, and slightly bend your thumb; then hold the arm tightly and section the vein with a concave incision as we have said; and be careful not to strike the artery in any part of the location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see it, as you tighten the ligature, inflammation in the place where you marked with your thumb, then that inflammation is arterial inflammation, and therefore avoid that area.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy as clear as a child's urine, and the blood is fine and red, then you know it is arterial blood; and then you should stop and pause your hand there for some time; and after that remove your hand, and if the bleeding stops, wait a few moments, then tie the arm there.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And keep the patient away from moisture, and let them be free of fear and do not allow them to use that arm for some days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the blood does not stop, and you must act without medical assistance present, then incise the artery if it appears to you; for the extremity is contracted, and the blood is spurting; or take a piece of cloth, and tear it, and use one part to tie it over the location of the vein with a descending ligature and with powders on the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the blood has stopped, that is good; but if not, then treat it with what precedes for remembering the location of the powders to stop the flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The removal of the bone in many cases is difficult due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of bandaging the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	For the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial for extracting blood from the upper part of the head and from below the chest; this is composed of branches of the basilica and of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And it is important for the phlebotomist to be overly cautious during the phlebotomy because below that area lies a nerve; if you puncture it while performing the phlebotomy and injure the nerve, it will cause stupor, and healing from this condition is difficult, and rarely does one recover completely. This nerve is visible in many cases but sometimes hidden and subtle, not revealed to everyone; therefore, when you perform phlebotomy on a section where there is such a possibility, avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should puncture the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of phlebotomy from the cephalic vein is that it extracts blood from the head and relieves ailments of the eyes.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And it is appropriate here to ensure that when you perform phlebotomy, you do so at the olive vein or the myrtus vein; for this is the safest of all veins, as it is neither near an artery nor a nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, when you perform phlebotomy, you must ensure that you do not puncture only the head of the lizard vein and instead seek a more distant location. Do not note it unless you injure it with the initial percussion during phlebotomy in some cases.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, sometimes a boil appears on some people, when it is not bloodletting in the first attack, we do not know how to deal with that boil.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	However, regarding the quality of that bloodletting and its consequences, in which it is necessary to think about their improvement.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is about which you should know that bloodletting is administered only for the preservation of health and with hope for its improvement and caution against the onset of diseases, and that bloodletting should be performed on one of the veins found in the neck, namely: cephalic, jugular, and basilic; and that bloodletting should be done at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter near mealtime, when signs of fullness appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And bloodletting should be performed on the third day or at the first hour of the morning, after three hours have passed.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	However, bloodletting that is administered should be done when there is convenience and necessity for it, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and at any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is necessary that a child not be bloodletted until they are fourteen years old, and a woman who is pregnant should not be bloodletted except from the fourth month to the seventh, and elderly people who have passed sixty years should not be bloodletted.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wants to be bloodletted in any way, it is necessary that they cleanse their bowels before bloodletting with a laxative, if there is retained feces in them, so that the veins do not attract superfluous fluids during the bloodletting of the cleansed bowels, and so that they do not affect the main limbs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	Let not venesection be performed on patients suffering from sea sickness or drunkenness, nor during the onset of illness or drunkenness when their blood is disturbed, nor in cases of dropsy. Moreover, avoid it if there is fear of colic, vomiting, or abdominal issues, and also if there has been excessive coition, labor, exercise after meals or prolonged wakefulness, or any cause that dissolves strength, whether physical or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And also consider the subtlety of the vapors before determining if the blood is thick, in foods and drinks, and in medicines if that is possible to do.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And also bathe if no cause prohibits it, or exercise in some way to make the blood finer.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And avoid venesection at the height of the day, which is around the third hour, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And ensure that the patient avoids all harmful animal incidents on that day, such as distress, anger, fear, and all physical exertions, such as excessive work, unnecessary labor, sexual activity, and similar activities.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at the time of seating, have present the causes for which men usually use aromatics and odors, as well as balms and similar substances according to quantity and possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And the one performing venesection should stand on higher ground than the patient who needs to be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extend his arm, and clean it with his own hand the veins two or three times; and then wrap the limb with a strap and wind it around twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let the ligature be timely placed, for if the ligature is not equal or if it is excessive, then prohibit the flow of blood; or if it is too slack, then prohibit the coagulation of the blood similarly.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And regarding the ligature, it should be such that he who is to have phlebotomy should rub his arms thoroughly beforehand until the veins are swollen and become apparent.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And regarding the phlebotomist, he anoints his phlebotomy instrument with a little old oil properly. And then places his finger of the left hand on that vein where he wishes to perform the phlebotomy so that the vein slightly recedes and the percussion is set since of the veins it is one which flees as if a cord were fleeing from the phlebotomy, and these are full of air, and when he places the phlebotomy instrument on those, they contract around it, and the phlebotomist understands; and the phlebotomy instrument does not open the vein, and if it opens it, that one is narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And thus, for this reason, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be cautious and diligent in all these matters.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then place the phlebotomy instrument, but if the vein is open in one spot, that is good; and if not, repeat this at another spot nearby, or above it if there is inflammation, if the area is not abscessed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area is abscessed, or the patient becomes weak, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, for it will quickly draw out the abscess, nor should the patient enter a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	About the vein-cutting let it be said if you love it.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the aperture is small and lets blood finely, and you fear that it will not yield the quantity of blood that you wish, then repeat the venesection in that spot according to straightness and adjust the aperture a bit, and do this with haste before the place becomes abscessed, for the place becomes abscessed in most men after little aperture.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if you see that it is already abscessed, then do not repeat it there, for it will serve you no purpose; and apply some part of the poultice of oil, for it disperses the blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And in this case, olive oil is better than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, apply a poultice of olive oil to every venesection where you cut the veins beyond the prohibition of blood flow, and do this with turpentine al-fadhak and sage when applied over the spot, for the blood is refined and becomes thin when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large abscess is generated in the place of the venesection, which happens sometimes, especially to those who have not been bled before except that time, or where there was little aperture of the vein, and then you should incise it, and apply over the spot a sponge infused in water and salt, slightly heated, and press that for one hour, for it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And it is necessary to do this near the discharge of blood from that vein or from another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if a black or greenish discoloration remains in the spot for several days, do not worry about it; and if you wish, apply some preparation of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some preparation of mint juice or plaster or something similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And from swellings there arise abscesses and elevations which require phlebotomy at the base.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore place your hand on that area, and if you find it soft, apply pressure to that spot; then that elevation is evil and bad. And be careful not to place anything there for any of the reasons mentioned, as blood will flow strongly from an artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply a plaster with styptic properties to that area so the spot becomes hardened, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And it is necessary to extract blood from everyone in proportion to the quantity of their strength and according to the color appearing on top of the blood.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, then let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and likewise, if it is acute, until its sharpness is abated.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And for one who is strong and healthy and has a need for bloodletting in one session, the phlebotomy from the vein should be increased and the bloodletting should be done slowly.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for one who is weak, do the opposite of that, and it is necessary to extract blood in small quantities, and let the procedure be done quickly.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best method to use in venous phlebotomy is the cross-section cut, not puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy is safe from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more effective and safer than phlebotomy based on latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	For those to whom it is accustomed to suffer fainting due to phlebotomy, you should treat them before the phlebotomy with a little bread infused in vinegar of raisins or simple oxymel heated; and extract from the artery in three or four stages.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if the patient is of a melancholic temperament, then before phlebotomy give bread infused in syrup of myrrh or in aromatic syrup flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or in an aromatic and sweetened syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs during phlebotomy and is caused by the loss of sweet blood, then give them to drink watered sweet syrup and a subtle fragrant syrup; and use aromatics with sugar, and let them hold their nose with it.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting due to evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And for those who wish to prevent their arm from swelling and to dissolve their blood a second time, it is suitable for them that the phlebotomy is for gentle evacuation, and its effect is to evacuate the blood little by little, as is according to the quantity of strength over continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But for those who wish to prevent their arm from swelling and to reduce their blood a second time, and if their body is strong, then do this about seven hours or nine after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But for those who wish to draw the blood from their body in the opposite direction to the side to which it declines, it is suitable that they be bled on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	Place that body in which the blood has become heated and excited and causes fever in such a way that the blood is let from it in one vein, and there should be a large quantity removed until fainting occurs, so that you maintain all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on the pulse of the side from which the blood is being let, so that death does not occur instead of fainting, for this often happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And when you wish to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, since the orifices of the vein are now closed and it has become difficult for the blood to flow out, do not press too forcefully or bend it abruptly, for this is very harmful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Handle the wound carefully so that phlebotomy can be performed a second time; or remove it with the inflammation caused by coagulation of the blood in the vein's orifice; or apply on it some turpentine, or sage, and press it gently until the blood has been fully evacuated.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, leave that wound and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood a second time and there is no excuse to avoid it, then bleed from that site on the other location or in another vein of the other arm.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "the cord of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the fossa or the basilica, when they are not obstructed or hidden, for it consists of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient immerses their hand in cold water until it turns red and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Here is the translation:
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the incision be wide and let your phlebotomy on it, which you perform over the joint of the hand, be small.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is stopped, now you immerse the hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the days of summer, now you are exempt from the immersion of the hand in hot water, and similarly the flow of blood is paused in hot water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because there are no pulsating veins or nerves there.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the right hand's vein is beneficial for diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of this phlebotomy is that you bind the hand with a ligature or with your hand, after placing it in hot water, until the vein is swollen and clearly visible to the observer; then make the incision transversely across it; and if you do not perform this correctly, none of this will be known.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And be careful not to leave your hand exposed after the phlebotomy, because there are nerves among the aforementioned areas stripped of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then immerse the hand in hot water and let the blood flow into it, because if you do not immerse it in hot water, the blood will clot at the venous opening, and the flow will be hindered.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is extracted in the required quantity, now apply oil and salt on the vein to prevent it from healing too quickly; similarly, you should do this in all cases.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	Here is the translation:
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And so it seems in the phlebotomy of the artery as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of the vena cephalica in phlebotomy is for diseases that are below the waist, such as diseases of the legs, and retention of menstruation, and for diseases of the joints and ulcers of old wounds, and similar ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the procedure for phlebotomy of the artery is that the patient immerses his foot in hot water and then rubs it until the veins become visible; and he places a cord around the joint of the foot; and the location of the vein is on the front part of the foot, and from there it branches out over the surface of the foot in several places.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore, phlebotomize the largest branch below the joint in front of the ankle, for it is better and more effective.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are below it on the surface of the foot, and stop your phlebotomy when you reach a point where you would otherwise cut across.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And so the phlebotomy is complete.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the release of blood is prohibited; then immerse the foot in hot water again and allow the blood to flow naturally until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake on the first attempt, then repeat the phlebotomy slightly above it, for that location is effective; and do not fear making a small error, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And in the same way I apply the scalpel to the other part equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, you should locate it as we have said, below the heel behind the cavity of the sole.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the procedure for phlebotomy on him is behind the hip when it is for therapeutic bleeding.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the phlebotomy on him is that the patient should enter a bath, and quickly and tightly wrap his leg from the waist to below the heel with four fingers in a thin strip of cloth, so that it does not appear otherwise.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, now you should perform phlebotomy on that spot according to each angle that is possible for you and according to the transverse position; or incise that area by incision or cut it by section, as the location of it is suitable.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in the words of men somewhat hidden; and if you find that spot, and it does not appear to full sensation, now phlebotomize some branch of it, which appears between the thumb and the ring finger on the back of the hand.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be careful of the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity that you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then loosen the binding and place a pad over the phlebotomy site, securing it tightly, for healing occurs quickly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of venesection and of the qualities of using those methods.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Venesections should be done with horns, or ivory, or wood.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Of bloodletting there are two methods: one involves incision and extraction of blood, and the other is bloodletting without incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this bloodletting which is without incision is done in two ways, as it can be with heat or without heat.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And for bloodlettings that are administered with incision and extraction of blood there are fourteen locations on the body, of which one is where phlebotomies are performed in al-nocrati, which is at the very back of the head; another location is just below both sides of the neck; phlebotomies of the chin below the jaw near the mouth; phlebotomies of the two cheekbones; phlebotomies of alohoster, which is above the collarbone; phlebotomies of two armpits; and phlebotomies of two thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And bloodletting that does not extract the blood but rather affects the small veins spread in the flesh, and by this it does not capture the virtue as it would with phlebotomy; nor is it necessary for bloodletting to be done with heat or without heat in any disease caused by repletion, so that the entire body may be evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity prompts bloodletting due to illness or continuously, administer it at any time at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, in the middle of the month, and at whatever times may be appropriate.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The reason for this is that there are people in whom blood is multiplied internally to the point where they need extraction through bloodletting; and in such individuals, you find heaviness and heat in their head. In others, you notice repletion and hardness in their face and head, as well as neck. Some show premature aging on their face and forehead, with darkness and dullness in their eyes. Others have the location of their bloodletting visibly affected. There are those whose pulse is multiplied. And there are some who taste blood in their mouth or whose tongue is coated with a substance that causes them to spit blood. Additionally, there are those whose sleep is excessive, and others who see blood during sleep along with pains and other similar symptoms.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	Therefore, when you encounter any such case among those mentioned, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, I command that ventilation be made after two or three hours have passed since midday.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the benefit of ventilation from the neck is that when it relieves gravity in the head and what has settled in the temples; but it should be done in such a way that it also aids in the evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventilation is at the site of the phlebotomy of the cephalic region.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not advisable to use it on one who has a complete fever, or in one who has a cold, for it can cause great harm to them.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And because of this, it should not be used on the elderly, and those whose heads are often diseased.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But for one who is continuously lying on it, forgetfulness may occur; and because of this, you should command the person performing the ventilation to pause their work briefly by lifting the cup away from the area to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But ventilation of the forehead is at the site of phlebotomy of the dark vein and the basilic vein: and because of this, it relieves asthma, constriction of the chest, splitting of the sternum, coughing, and congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is necessary to apply the forehead cupping lightly, for if it is left too long, it can cause weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the ventilation of the temples relieves pain in the head, ophthalmia, headache, nasal congestion, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is at the site of phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And you should order the barber-surgeon not to press too hard with his hand during incision so as not to cut an artery and cause a flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And in suction, place the chin to confer with the palate in the mouth, and for the corruption of the gums, and for the appearance of the diseases that are in the mouth, and stand as a substitute for phlebotomy between the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But the suction that is performed on the two spatulas corresponds to capitation, which is made by an accumulation of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the suction of both parts inside the fingers corresponds to the puncture of three veins, namely the basilica, fusca, and cephalic, because it attracts blood from all those larger veins that are in the flesh, and these smaller veins from other thicker veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And order the barber-surgeon not to proceed too much in incision, for the area is bare of flesh, and leave it lest you injure nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a suction that is performed on the thighs and corresponds to hemorrhoids of the anus and to ulcers that are nearby.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you should order the barber-surgeon to use a large suction cup, and let it be made of horn, for the area requires strong drying; and apply strong suctions followed by subtle ones and let it be incised during incision.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But small suction cups should be used with meticulous care, for they draw blood from the entire body, and correspond to chronic pains in the loins and lower back, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and correspond to bothor (boil) and ademil (pustule); and stand as a substitute for phlebotomy of two saphena veins, alahorcoben, and two cavilhas.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, these weaken the whole body and cause syncope in some men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the windy ones, apply the dressing to the wound from the side opposite the windy ones of two sides.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the dressings is that you place the dressing at the beginning dry and then change it according to the season, and do not prolong the position of the dressings, but place them lightly, and remove them cautiously, so that the humors come to the site appropriately.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop repeating this and continue until you see the area turn red and swell, and the rigor of the blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Now you should incise and change the dressing little by little, and then consider the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For the man who has tender flesh with few pores should be incised once and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And instruct the dresser to enlarge the incision slightly and proceed with the dressing with ease and promptness.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thick, then it is necessary to incise twice, because on the first incision the way for the subtlety of the blood and its moisture is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But on the second incision, it is for the thorough extraction of the thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very impure, then a third incision should be made so that it achieves the desired result.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	In conclusion, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a small amount, a scarification is sufficient for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract more blood, we perform two scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to scarify with a deeper incision.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term "scarification" refers to the depth of the incision being only superficial.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the skin of the person to be scarified is thick, hard, dark, and has small pores, it is necessary to anoint the areas for cupping with soothing, penetrating, and resolving oils; in summer, such as aloes oil or violet oil, or oil of daisies, or chickweed oil; and in winter, narcissus oil, lily oil, camomile oil, or similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick and congealed, then the oil should be henna oil, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or anise oil, or similar.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the cupping vessel has wide pores and is applied to soft flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and before the application of cupping, the areas where the cups will be placed should be washed with rose water or cold water mixed with solutrum, or chickweed water, or betony water, or similar.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for the person whose blood has much moisture, wash their cupping areas with vinegar water, or with water of myrtle and sumac, or similar.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for the person whose excesses are thick, wash their cupping areas with old vinegar, or with water of savory, which is marjoram, or decoction of anise, or chamomile, or similar.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	Therefore, ensure that the suction is preserved before bathing; handle it so that it is administered shortly after bathing for one or two hours, and make sure they sleep near the suction.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is needed to be done to regulate the use of suction or bloodletting before suction therapy.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	At the beginning, if the one who is to perform suction or the one who needs phlebotomy is choleric and there is wind in the sharp blood with inflammation, then it is necessary for them to take cooling causes, such as sour grapes, endive with vinegar and lettuce, saffron, julep, and similar things.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And let them pause from their foods such as pork, and meat of beneficial birds, and seasoned foods with acids, and similar things.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for the one whose constitution is weak, let them drink rose syrup, or saffron syrup made from seeds, and sumac, and something fragrant midway between morning and noon; and advise them to use moderation in drinking and eating, and to avoid foods such as pork, fish, poultry, small birds, and dove.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And on the day of suction and phlebotomy, let their drinking be more than their food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And let it be given to them to drink at certain times ambergris alcohol or medicine of musk, such as muscat, or alepheta before suction or phlebotomy or shortly after, so that the principal members are comforted and the blood is refined; and they should not take those heating substances.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	Here are the veins that should be used for venesection: those located in the region of the neck, on the sole and ankle, on the navel, at the joints, and in the hollow of the armpit, because these members cannot endure incisions upon them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And they are not sought for any other purpose than to attract blood from a member, just as we apply cupping to the breast in cases of excessive bleeding from the nose; and they use it where there is need to dissolve solidified congestion in a member, just as we apply it to the abdomen and navel; for this rarifies the member, heats it up, and alleviates the pain by resolving the congestion.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And cupping should be applied to the nostrils when they are blocked or stuffy, for by the power of attraction it raises the obstructed matter and eliminates the phlegm from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, it does the same when applied to the chest and sole due to congestion, as it releases what is enclosed there.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these cuppings should be administered only with suction; some are also applied over fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some cuppings should be administered filled with hot water in cases of ailments affecting the sole.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is because the cupping vessel should be full and larger; it can be hot water alone or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of a cupping vessel applied with fire: the diameter of its opening should be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the interior space should be half a palm; and in its middle, at the place that is in the circuit, it should be half as well, the thickness should be small according to the amount that fits inside a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Make a pad of egg whites or citrus peel, of thick margins, linen, bands and clean so that it does not lead to the limb being placed upon it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And place above it a crossbar of wood or iron, on which is placed a candle for the light.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this suction cup should be larger than the one we have recommended; and the size of it according to the illnesses and the condition of the person using it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the suction cups for children and weakened individuals should be smaller than those for young adults and people with larger frames.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this suction cup over the fire on the limb is that it should extend the skin over the fire properly in front of a small candle made of wax, and place it above the crossbar in the proper location of the suction cup, so that the fire is lit around the lower part to prevent the patient's body from being burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And it should be placed directly on the limb of the patient, and the hand should be on the area we have mentioned, so that when we use the suction cups and do not need to hold the hand while steam is applied over that area, the suction cup will dissolve quickly.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And gently apply heat to the skin according to its manner, and repeat this if you need to use it again.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	But in the suction cup that is administered for pleurisy, it is filled with water, in which there is no crossbar or area mentioned, and it is not applied except when it is filled with water and placed on the limb.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: And the larger this suction cup is, the better, because it can receive a greater quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter xcviij.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting should not be administered in movable members but in those members where the application of suction cups is impossible due to their small size, such as the gums and similar areas; or on parts bare of flesh, such as the fingers and nose and similar areas.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those leeches that you have found should be in the waters below, clean and free from corruption.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then they should be left in the water below for a day and night until they are hungry, so that there is no remaining cause in their belly; and then evacuate the body at the beginning of phlebotomy and suction cup application; and then rub the patient's limb until it reddens; and then place them on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and swollen.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if suction can be applied to the area with a cup, it is better for recovery.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the area with vinegar and then with warm water; and it should be rubbed and squeezed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the blood extends from the site of the leech bites and there is residual blood, then place a piece of cloth on cold water, and apply it until the bleeding stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the bleeding increases, then sprinkle powdered vitriol or similar astringent powders on it until the bleeding stops; or apply masticated fava beans to the site, and leave them there until they adhere to the area, at which point the bleeding will be stopped.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	In circumcision, if it is necessary, repeat the application of bloodletting strips, when it is possible to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the bloodletting strips are prohibited from suspension, then at that time it should be washed with fresh blood or leave a needle in the places between which there is blood; and afterwards they should be paused, because those when feeling any blood will quickly heal.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want to stop bleeding, sprinkle a little powdered aloes, or salt, or ash over it, and the bleeding will quickly cease.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the chapter of the third part: on restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is often considered necessary in the art of medicine; it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations of bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, be aware that those who boast about this chapter are foolish doctors and the vulgar, as well as those who for any length of time have not regarded the books of the Ancients or read a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is done that this method of the scientists in our land is private; and I have not forgotten it for any length of time at all; and I have not applied what follows, but through the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying to understand them, until I extracted the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then I directed myself to experimentation and study throughout the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and on which my experience is based; now I abbreviate it for you and free it from the burden of lengthiness; and abbreviate it to the point of brevity; and demonstrate it at the end of clarification; and form many forms of the instruments used therein, as added by explanation, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	A summary and collection of fractures of the bones, from which a preliminary explanation is necessary before we begin to recall the parts of fractures and their various types.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us proceed with the prologue of this chapter to summarize the discourse; and the chapters that are essential for understanding at the beginning are necessary for the craftsman and to stand on the truth of those things; it is for you and others like you who wish to know or learn this noble art.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And so I say that when it happens to someone to have a fracture, dislocation, torsion, or fall, at that moment it is necessary for you to consider at the beginning whether to perform venesection or to bandage them, or any other immediate treatment, if there are no prohibitive causes, such as weakness of strength, or if it happens to an infant, or an elderly person in decline, or during a time of extreme heat or severe cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And you should be content with food such as fresh herbs and the meat of birds and small animals; we prohibit fatty meats and foods that fill the body excessively, and all food that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure of an abscess being cured, and if you do not fear an effusion of matter into the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And now return the patient to their original regimen that they were accustomed to follow.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And so when the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious foods that are moist and heavy, in which there is viscosity, such as food made from boiled wheat with water, rice, peas, beef tripe, eggs, fresh fish, and similar foods, and with this regimen, healing of the fracture occurs more easily and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that the bones in those who are old and in young children, as well as in the elderly, cannot be set or consolidated according to their nature by the drying of the members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are set and consolidated according to their nature for a long time by the drying of those members, and they remain set and consolidated until the end of their softness, just as the bones of young children do.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature adjusts and applies them over the broken bone from all parts for some cause similar to glue, in which there is a thickness that adheres and strengthens it as they congeal together until the end of its strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning does not prevent it from performing its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to avoid giving the patient foods that are heavy and viscous and gross, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The variety of fractures depends on the variety of the member. 
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for the fracture of the bone of the chest is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the arm; and similarly all other members are different among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And you will find a description of every type of fracture, expanded in its own separate chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Consider the diversity of fractures within themselves.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the types of bone fractures are diverse within themselves; for there is one type of curved fracture different from those that occur in the stars; and some fractures are made according to the length of the bone: and among the fractures of the shaft and splinters and complete and incomplete, just as it is done when a pen is prepared for writing, there is a fracture due to impact and disruption in the head, and there is a small crack fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And each type has its own proper treatment in the restoration of it, as will be recalled separately in their respective places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Consider the signs of a bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this a bone fracture is known: its twisting, and the prominence and appearance of it to the touch, and what happens when you press on it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, when there is no apparent twisting in the location or sound, and when you touch the bone with pressure and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	However, it is possible that there may be twisting or a small crack. In this case, do not press on it with your hand and compress it entirely; instead, wait and apply the medicines of which mention will be made shortly at the moment when it is appropriate to do so; and it may also be narrow due to subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that when the place is arched and not divided into two or another part where it does not suffer from swelling, you should begin from your hour to correct the condition of the affected area where an abscess occurs.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess occurs there, then leave it for some days until the abscess subsides; and afterwards bandage it according to each method that you can of lightness and of support.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration of it and the alignment of it is easier than with the bone in which swelling has occurred.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And afterwards strengthen it according to what will come to mind regarding it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if the bone is swollen, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from both parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And place yourself in such a position that you can put the limb in a bandage according to its natural figure, while the parts of the broken member are extended, then it forces you to return those addictions with support and according to each way that you can in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful according to your strength that no harm comes from your operation either by injury or damage; and strive according to your ability to apply one bone to its companion bone according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is necessary that at that opportune moment you touch with your hand that which needs attention, and if you see any diverse cause, correct it and bandage it according to the extent of your skill.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And from an incorrect and excessive extension or compression, so do false physicians cause an abscess to occur through their operation, or they cause a contraction in the limb as we have seen this happen due to their improper manipulations.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And in connection with this, properly join and equalize the appropriate operation and restriction of that limb; ensure rest and tranquility. Warn the patient about this and see that they do not harm themselves during their wakeful hours or while sleeping, observe their agitation and movement, and examine all their actions with full attention; and wait until the position of the limb is such that it ensures relief from pain, which happens because when in a certain position, there is pain or injury. Therefore, change to another position where there is no pain; and ensure that this position is straight and equal so that the limb does not become distorted when restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the restriction of the tranquil limb is what I recommend; because you should know that broken limbs vary in their smallness and greatness and in the form of each one.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small, such as the arm and the finger and similar ones, the wrapping should be of soft fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But for those that are large, such as the thigh or the chest, it is necessary to wrap them with hard bandages, because these bandages connect and secure the large limb firmly from all sides in an equal restriction, so that no dirt enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And when you begin, after the proper equalization of the limb, pause conveniently for that, on the site of the fracture with three or four layers of bandages depending on the limb; and tighten your hand a little with the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And apply to it the most sovereign poultice for the place of the fracture, and tighten moderately that bandage with which you have bound the place of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then lengthen the bandage around the place of the fracture a little, and loosen the binding gradually, until you take off most of it.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it around the broken place with a binding, and afterwards apply to it the bindings below the fracture; and let your operation be in the tightening of the binding and in the loosening of that one as we have said about the first binding above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place between the bandages a piece of soft linen or cloth on which the unevenness of the fracture is padded, if there is any unevenness; and if not, do not place anything there for this reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place on the other bandage, and afterwards apply plasters properly made soon if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area, and now place on that which cures the abscess and reduces the swelling; and leave this for several days; and then you tighten over it the bandages.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the plasters be half a cubit wide in length, and well formed wisely; or let them be made of willow wood; or from strips of palm; and let the width of each plaster be according to this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the plaster that is placed over the fracture should be a little thicker and longer than the others, and the length of the plaster according to how it fits the limb in size and smallness; and then tighten over the plasters another bandage as your first binding; and afterwards bind above with wax moderately as we have said about binding, and it is that your binding should be tighter near the fracture, and as much as it is distant from the fracture, the binding should be looser.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And let the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and let them be soft; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen some foolish people use ropes of twisted hemp for their threads, it is a great mistake, when one considers the equality of tension.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And likewise, very fine threads are not appropriate, for you will not achieve the desired tension with them, and it is necessary that there be not less than one digit between knot and knot.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is injured at the ends of the bones near the sutures in such places, then pause and use threads of lion’s sinew or matted wool until it does not cause harm to him.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes a fracture occurs due to a blow, and there is a disruption in the chain, and I recall this particular case in the second chapter.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not all broken members should be set with splints on the first day; the reason for this is that when the member is large, it should not be placed on splints immediately but after about five or seven days or more, according to your certainty of the occurrence of an abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of plasters with which the Ancients restored fractures, dislocations, and twists, which were applied over injuries.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of a plaster for the quick restoration of fractures, suitable for delicate conditions and especially for women and children, as it does not generate heat or irritation: take flour powder, which is the residue from the grinding process that sticks to the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And confine it as it is, but sieve it with white cloth, and pause the compounding of it not thin nor subtle; and then use it.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method for plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: recipe of asafetida, of lead danum, of acacia, of inula, and migrauch, which is the rind of wild millet, of each a drachm x; of myrrh and aloes each a drachm v; aloe chil each a drachm xx; all are to be ground and sieved together and mixed with water or with white cloth if the preparation is warm; and then use this plaster, for it is well composed and quickly restores broken bones, and confers health upon men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method for a plaster to treat fractures and twists: recipe of migrauch (rind of wild millet) and met of white lead each a drachm x; of myrrh and aloes each a drachm v; of acacia a drachm vi; of Armenian bole a drachm xx.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All should be triturated in a mortar with a pounding motion, and then sieved, and compounded with water or with white cloth if the mixture is warm, and it should be administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method for a plaster for joints and bones that have come out of their places, and for accidental pain in those areas and for fissures and fractures: take clean wool and immerse it in vinegar and warm oil and apply it to the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	Note that this plaster is not for restoration, but for abscesses and properly expelling pains.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method for a plaster that restores broken bones: take fresh leaves of the fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; crush them together and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of applying a shortened plaster for the restoration of a bone fracture and when you want to resolve the remnant of an abscess: take rhizomes of elder, chamomile flowers, and violets, and flour of spelt, of each one part; mix all finely and cook in wine, if the member is not burned.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is burned, now confect that in cold cilantro water or in water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of a stronger plaster for resolution than this first one, when there occurs a hard abscess during the restoration of the limb: take rhizomes of elder and seeds of linseed, and buckthorn, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, of each one equal part; all should be finely mixed and cooked in savory water or warm water or in wine, whichever is appropriate according to the quality of the limb and the condition indicated by its appearance.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	However, Hippocrates does not mention in his book that it should be paused on the broken limb during its restoration other than cerot made of wax and oil, and he recommends that it be midway between thickness and fineness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	However, Galen is seen to have them applied on the broken limb during its restoration and for causes in which there is drying with a little heat as well as substances like myrrh, saffron, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of plaster to relieve injury and pain: take linseed, sesame seeds, human hair cut or bird's feather, elder rhizome, and salt, in equal parts; mix them finely and sieve them and cook them, then make a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The amount according to which it is necessary that the dressing remain and should then be removed, is that you consider whether there is no pain or swelling or the bone is not displaced from its place; otherwise, do not remove it for several more days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is severe pain or swelling or inflammation in the area, then you should be cautious or remove that dressing at once, and remove the plaster as well.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a piece of cloth and a sponge soaked in lemon juice, and dip it into boiled water, and with this wash the area until the swelling subsides and the pain is alleviated; then let the limb rest for one hour; afterwards apply on it pure wool submerged in vinegar and oil or rose oil, and bind it over it for one night until you are sure of no abscess formation, and that the swelling of the limb has subsided, and the pain from it has been relieved.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat that gentle wrapping and small plaster without tightening it as much as your first one, and gently do this until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you see that the abscess and hardness and pain and swelling and all the symptoms have subsided completely, and you need a plaster and wrapping, then repeat that as you did at the beginning equally.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no cause of those we have mentioned occurs to the limb, then do not remove it but leave it for three days or four or five or seven; and in some cases all this is left for twenty days, as seems appropriate by removing the dressing, as we said, until the fracture adheres, and the flesh coagulates over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	At this point adjust more strictly than in your first stricture completely, and adjust according to the swelling of the patient's flesh, as was mentioned previously.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	But if you see the site of the fracture already drying and wasting more than is appropriate, then you will know that nutrition is prevented from reaching it; therefore, apply a poultice to it with tepid water whenever you do so; and do this for three days in total; then slightly loosen the bandage, and through this operation direct nourishment to the member, and it will be quickly healed.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But what foolish restorers of the fractured member do otherwise when it is not restored at the proper time and in a straight manner, according to their procedure, is an error and great fear, and if this were true, the Ancients would have enlarged on this in their books and warned against it.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do this, which is why it is more reasonable to assume that they do not do so.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter Second: On fractures when they occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the impact of an object, and the impact removes part of the bone internally, just as it would in wood, and for this reason this type is called a splinter. Or the object may cut some part of the bone, cutting through the flesh but not penetrating entirely through; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the severity of these two fractures may be great or slight, and there is also a fracture known as comminuted or crushed; and the cause of this is an impact with something weak or falling onto a stone, and similar circumstances.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is either penetrating that is approaching the panniculus which is below the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the danger of these two fractures is great or little.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of the fracture that is in the bone, in the subtlety of the small fibers, and by this it is named this species of fracture capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is the fracture that is made either by falling or by the impact of a stone and similar things, which causes some lamina of the bone to enter into its partitions, and it is made in the place of concavity as happens with the bones of the arm when they occur due to their impact, and it is the parting of their entry into the inner parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this is mostly made in the bones of living beings, as with the heads of children.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And for all these kinds of fractures, treatments are used, such as pads and plasters separated.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will return to the reminder of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And you shall know all these kinds of fractures by detection on them and by inquiry into their attempts and the appearance of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary fracture is known by this: it is revealed on the bone, and when it is cleaned, it appears black on the surface.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	But in the treatment of fractures, consider at the beginning the symptoms of the patient, and if you see by these symptoms that it signifies by evident signs fear, such as vomiting with anger, extension, loss of understanding, hoarseness of voice, fainting, acute fever, and similar conditions along with their rigor, and if they resemble the symptoms in major dispositions, doubt whether he can be healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if for uncommon cases you hope for a cure, then you begin the treatment of them.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause of which is that if a person comes to you with the illness at its beginning as it is an illness, and this is in the days of winter, then it is necessary for you to study the condition of the bone until the day fourteen according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then you must remove the bone before the seventh day, because what is above the bone may become corrupted by inflammation, and that accidents which we have recounted may occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the membrane covering the brain and is in small fragments and attrition, then you must excise the fragmented and abraded part, as I will recount to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And you should shave the head of the patient who is ill, and uncover the bone according to custom and method as best you can according to the shape of the illness, so that it is easy for you to work on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you that you need to detect the bone, deal with blood flow or an abscess by cauterization, then you must proceed with what is necessary, which is to cover the area with cloths infused in vinegar and rose oil, and allow the illness to rest until the abscess is subdued and there is no more bleeding; then begin circumferential treatment around the bone and its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one method is that you excise the bone with sharp scissors, and this is the form of it: And then use another scissor slightly wider than the previous one; and this is the form of it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then apply some of the pus to the second incision.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is necessary that you have various incisions at your disposal, some of which are used for pus longer than others; and some of them are quicker in their effects than the others, and they range from sharpness to dullness, and they may be made of iron or leather.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in tapping on the incisions so that you do not injure the head and cause harm to it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is hard and strong, it is necessary to perforate around it before you apply the incisions, using shallow grooves, which are called non-deep trenches.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called this only because those do not reach the end of the skull bone to what is nearby; therefore, at the groove there is a rounded edge or margin above it near the head, similar to a small border or circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is convenient that you take many of these grooves, each of which suits the sharpness of each bone, so that there are present throughout the entire skull edges that are sharp, with quantities in length and shortness according to the amount of sharpness of this bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three types of grooves: The quality of perforating around the broken bone is that you place the groove on the bone and rotate it with your tools until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the groove to another location, and proceed in this manner throughout the entire area according to the quantity of its thickness or around it.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Here is the translation:
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And see that you keep such careful watch that the incisor does not touch any part of the thigh.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when you have circumscribed the perforated bone, and it is separated from the thigh if it is continuous with it, and you will extract that part, shave and equalize that in roughness to what is on the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor, but make sure it is more blunt and finer than other incisors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any part of the small and delicate bones remains, now take that with ease with what is appropriate to you among the instruments; and then treat the wound with lint and dressings as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is light, distant from fear, which Guy of Chauliac greatly praises; and this is the speech about it: It is necessary for you at the beginning to start revealing the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most severe and evident, until when you have uncovered that part and you have paused below it with the tip of this slow and joyful incisor, which has this form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the lens-shaped part should be left intact and you should not incise any part of it, while the sharp-edged part should be divided into two flaps longitudinally, as you see; so that the lens-shaped part fits against the thigh with its sharp edge fitting into the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then strike upon the incisor of one part with a small mallet until you incise all the bone with ease as it is revolved, and be sure to protect the panniculus so that no accident happens in any way that you fear, even if the practitioner were the most timid of all men and the least knowledgeable among them; certainly, and even if he were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If there is any cause associated with the bone of the neck in some places of the bone, cut that part where the lens-shaped part [of the instrument] reaches, and deliver that part from it easily, since it can be delivered without harm or fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the neck, and that which is abscised or remains of the bone is its surface, and it lies in the roughness and small particles, then you should scrape away that roughness and eradicate those particles with fine razors for which you have prepared various quantities so that you may administer the most suitable ones wherever necessary during your operation on the broken bone and use them correctly according to how you proceed.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you should administer in your proportion at which you scrape the bone initially with the broadest of those razors, and gradually use finer ones as you proceed, and do not stop doing this continuously until you reach administering the thinnest and most delicate of all of them.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In each of the other small, delicate fractures and subtle fractures, you should administer care according to what is needed for the correction of the bone.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is because they are not afraid or hesitant about all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And stand on what we have written regarding major fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the neck is swollen when you remove the bone, then take a piece of cloth according to the size of the wound, and immerse it in warm oil, and place that over the wound opening; then take another folded or triple-layered cloth and immerse it in vinegar and warm oil, and place that over the first cloth, doing this as lightly as possible so as not to press on the cicatrix; then apply a broad bandage over it, but do not tighten it more than necessary for the wound.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	If you are sure that there is no danger of an abscess after one or two days, then untie it and apply medicines which are too drying, such as lint strips and flour paste, and powder of onions and arishta, and similar things.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you should make of these medicines powder which is finely ground over the wound, as they are dry; and generally, apply any medicine whose property is to cleanse without irritating.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be careful according to your skill that the wound in your treatment is clean; and let it not become infected or inflamed; nor allow its virulence to increase. For when it is situated over the panniculus cerebri, it corrupts that part and poisons it, and thus you will bring about a serious illness due to this malice.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it affects the brain, as when the bone is penetrated and especially when there is pressure on the wound, and there is discoloration on its surface; and therefore consider these signs if you see the symptoms of illness that we have mentioned, for then you know it to be dangerous without doubt.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if the discoloration is not from the wound itself but from the medicine applied above it, and it is due to the property of that medicine causing the discoloration, then take one part honey and three parts olive oil, and soak a piece of linen in these, and apply that over the brain; and thereafter treat it with appropriate healing spices until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is severed.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken except into two main parts, or sometimes one of those lesser divisions, because in it there are two bones, for the lower part is cartilaginous, and it is not broken, but only bruised, swollen, and distorted.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts of it is broken, then you should insert your little finger into the side of the nose, and reduce that fracture from within with your index finger, and with your thumb without, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this with ease, and be careful that your operation does not cause pain to the patient.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then you should use the end of a probe that has some thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should proceed as described.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And when you restore it on the first day of the fracture if possible; and if not, then after seven or ten days, you should wait until the swelling subsides.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And afterwards insert into the end of the nose a pad of linen if the fracture is in one part, or two pads if the fracture is in two parts, and let each pad have enough thickness to fill the cavity of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient restorers say that the pads should be soaked in butter, and changed every day, but I have not seen this practiced; however, it is necessary that the pad be soaked in almond oil mixed with powder of flowers; and afterwards leave the pad until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	In some cases, insert in the nose, instead of cotton, a piece of wool wrapped in lion's skin; and let it be that already the fracture of the nose is so severe and that the patient not be prevented from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, use cotton.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another swelling occurs that needs to be cauterized, apply a plaster to the nose with cerate or honey mixed with vinegar and rose oil, or with myrrh.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if no swelling occurs that needs to be cauterized, then you should apply a plaster over it with sesame flour and powdered eggshell mixed in albumen of egg; and afterwards place it on the lion's skin, and do not cover the nose with anything.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are comminuted, then you should incise above them, and extract them with instruments that are suitable for this; and afterwards close the fissure, and treat it with substances that promote healing and consolidation, and with plasters appropriate for this.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there is an injury inside the nose, then you should treat it with cotton and administer lead cannulas until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the lower jaw is broken and there is no wound on the surface, examine whether the fracture is only on the outside and not split into two parts and curved inward, then its diagnosis is easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	If the fracture is on the right side, then you should insert your left finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly if the fracture is on the left side, then at that time insert your said finger from the right hand; and push it so as to bring together the fractured bone from within with ease to the parts outside, with your other hand from the outside part of the bone; in this way properly equalize it.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then you should apply extension to both parts as straight as possible so that the equalization may be feasible.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is concussion of the teeth with disruption, then strengthen those that you expect will break with thread of gold or silver or silk; and immediately place on the broken jaw a piece of cloth, and immediately place on it a double layer of cloth, and place on the large cloth a properly made bandage or a piece of soft material equal in length to the jaw; and then bind it above as you are accustomed to binding it and as is convenient for application, so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and give him food in the form of thin soups.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you find that the shape has already been altered in any way, then on the third day you should examine and loosen it; and then correct what has already been altered from it and plaster it with powder of flour, egg albumen, or flaxseed meal, after you have removed the cloth from it, and place a thin layer of linen over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then as it stands attached and adjusted that plaster to it, and if the position of the bone is not altered, leave it so that you do not loosen it until it is healed and the fracture has strengthened; for this fracture usually becomes strong in about three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another abscess appears which requires cauterization, then administer what we have said about similar cases during the process to ensure it is healed, and let that abscess be treated accordingly.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is a splinter, then consider whether the bone fragment is separated or displaced. At this point, use your skill to remove those splinters with what is necessary for their removal using the appropriate instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the splinter is narrow, then enlarge it with a scalpel as much as your need dictates.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have removed those splinters and none remain to be treated, then close the opening of the wound if it is wide; and if not, apply one of the plasters that are appropriate for this and promote healing until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the collarbone when it is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	There are various ways the collarbone can be fractured when broken in front of the muscle, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	For it may be fractured, separated, or broken into two parts without displacement; and this is easy to restore. Or it happens with displacement, making restoration difficult. Or the fracture occurs with a splinter, making it complicated.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the procedure when the fracture occurs with a splinter is that you should have two assistants present; one to hold the displaced collarbone and assist in stabilizing it, and the other to extend the neck towards that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	In adjusting the splints for the fracture, make sure to shape them as is appropriate, and ensure there are neither too many elevations nor depressions.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then place below the armpit of the injured side a pad made of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to your necessity; extend and elevate the shoulder and compress the pad with your hand so that you equalize the fracture as is appropriate.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot draw the end of the collarbone to the outer parts, so that it reaches its proper position, then have the patient lie supine on their neck, and place a pad over the muscle, about midway in size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant should press the muscle from below so that the bone of the collarbone is elevated to its proper place, and then you correct the fracture and align it with the splints mentioned.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel splinters of the collarbone and small pieces, then it is necessary to cut around them and extract those splinters with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is stuck in the bone, then you must devise an incision with one of the scalpels that you have prepared for this purpose, after having placed below the collarbone the instrument used by the scribe; and this instrument is made of wood or iron and has the following shape:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to the curve of a bowl, whose shape is concave; and its width should be according to your need for it, depending on the size of the bone or its smallness.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	Make the length of the tool as suitable as you can for the operation; it should have two ends, and one end should be broad and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound you have incised when you extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and you are sure it will form an abscess, then you should now approximate the two lips of the wound with a suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear it will not form an abscess, then you should employ the wound with dressings and powders according to the quantity of the wound's disruption.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess forms, then apply a dressing soaked in vinegar and rose oil, and place it over that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	And when the strapping of the bone when it is in a wound and section, you should apply a plaster made from flour mixed with egg white, and place it over the area above the fracture. If needed, place a sphere underneath where the hair grows, and then take linen bandages, which should be as long as your hand and about one palm wide; then place double powders on top of the area and the plaster. After that, take a thin board with a width of three fingers and similar length; wrap it in cloth, and then bind this cloth around the injured part over where the fracture is located. Then apply ointment as directed, roll it above the neck and below the hairline and under the armpit, reduce it to all parts until the strapping of the fracture matches its proper alignment, and ensure that nothing remains hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And so that the splint is not loosened over the broken bone; and therefore it is necessary that you see the patient every day, and when the bandaging is loose or you see that the splint has already been moved, then you must correct this and tighten the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And place the patient's pillow at the back of his neck, and put something underneath to raise it so that during sleep the head is slightly elevated; thus raising the helper (scapula) on one side, and therefore elevating the fracture of the collarbone with the muscle; or have the arm bound to the side of the neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the bandaging unless you find an abscess in the vicinity, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then replace the plaster if you see that it needs to be done, and adjust it in the joint and restore it so that it remains there until the fracture of the collarbone is healed and has coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the method in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some people it is done in less time.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The shoulder blade is broken in the middle and not shattered but with its edges cracked.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when it is broken at that location — and it is broken in the middle of it — and it is known only by palpation, then according to the figure of the fracture prepare yourself and reduce it according to its natural shape in every way you can manage.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then put on the place powder of ground egg whites and lion's fat; and then put on powder of double cloth; and then put on the plate lint very finely according to the quantity of the spoon all or at most a little.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	And if you leave the plate concave in some parts of the spoon, then you fill that concavity with lion's fat, and then press the plate according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then bind it above with linen strips with moderate tension and fix the plate in place so that it does not move from its position.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And examine the bandaging each day; and every time it is softened, apply another layer and tighten it, and adjust the plate if it has moved from its position.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And place the dressing on its proper side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spoon is restored in xx days or in xx.v days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number of days is completed, then you remove the bandaging, and be sure that these are bones for which there was no initial fear nor dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if pus appears in the bone area and you place a bandage there, then you cut into it, remove it, and proceed as we have said for the fracture of the clavicle or for the suppuration of an abscess, should that occur here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of foot fractures.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot sometimes is broken in the middle and remains relatively simple; however, its extremities often move, causing cicatricization and comminution.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	Of the accidents when the bone is broken are that it inclines towards the inner parts and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, and spitting blood; and it is manifest in the cavity of the broken bone and not hidden from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back, and a bolster is placed between the shoulders; then press the muscles, and adjust the ribs with two or more ribs, and delicately perform the operation and adjustment in every possible way suitable for this purpose, until the figure of the bone returns as necessary.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place the plaster and cotton over thin laths of wood or reeds or similar light materials, as you wrap it in cloth; then carefully bind that over the broken bone without pressing too hard; and go around the binding according to the roundness of the back several times, and tighten that with moderate strength; then observe the bandage at all times, and when it softens, tighten it again.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity requires the removal of that due to corrosion or swelling, or pain, or abscess which occurs in the area, then you must cut and loosen that and remove the plaster and rectify what has occurred according to the method of treatment; and then reapply the plaster, if it is necessary for this purpose; and adjust the binding until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in thick parts where they lie next to each other; and at the extremities of them in front, such contusions do not happen there because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And concerning the nerve, there is no deception regarding its sensation; you must investigate it as mentioned.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that it equalizes the fracture as mentioned by the possible method, within which it is aligned as necessary, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a splint if you deem it necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs inclines towards the inner parts, it often causes severe pain and piercing sensations, like those that occur when one weeps, and because of this the bone puts on a covering; and there is difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of blood; and this is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the Ancients were skilled in that which involves generating terms.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And what they say is: it is necessary to avoid foods that cause inflammation and gas, so that the abdomen does not become swollen and extended, and thus the fracture is pushed towards the outer parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But we should be cautious with this to avoid it being a light cause for generating an abscess, if it does not occur; and if it does occur, then it helps in dealing with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them say that it should be paused above the application of gas relief and then suck out with strength; this is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the gas might draw the excesses to the site due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them say: it is necessary to cover the area with wool that has been submerged in hot oil, and place poultices between the ribs so that it is filled, making the bandaging even as you wrap it according to its roundness; then treat the injury as one would for pleurisy with food therapy and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the patient is very constrained by pain which they cannot endure, and the bone has penetrated through the dressing with a puncture wound, we fear for the patient; at that time it is necessary to cut above the location, expose the broken part, and immediately apply an instrument to secure the fracture, the memory of which precedes, and that we easily cut the bone and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And immediately adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with sutures, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs internally, then carefully incise it and apply powder in boiled oil on the site, and treat the patient with what is appropriate for the internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let them be reclined on the side on which they sleep until they are healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the spine of the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	In some cases, fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and similarly in their healing, as well as in the spine of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when such an accident happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, then consider this: if the veins are already softened, numb, and dead, and cannot be moved or stretched, and when you press on them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle and there is no pain in them, then you know that they will not recover, and in such conditions it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they respond and there is constriction when you press on them and pierce them with a needle, then you know that the bone in the neck is safe and that the patient will recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the neck like this and want to know whether it will heal or not, then look at its condition.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Now if you see that someone has become weak, and it happens in the way that usually happens to most people, and shortly after lying on their back they feel windiness and involuntary evacuation, and sometimes they are bent backward and want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and at that point do not strive for a cure for them.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of those causes occur, then the condition is better and farther removed from danger.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for them is to apply a poultice to reduce the abscess after placing over the affected vertebra olive oil that has been slightly heated, or two eggs that are boiled; place this on it several times during the day until the abscess is reduced.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And now apply one of the soothing and restorative plasters, and wrap it with a bandage; and instruct the patient to use rest and calm, and not to sleep on the side where they feel pain until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that the bone is disjointed or any cause that has separated it, then you should reduce it and set the bone; and afterwards approximate the two lips of the wound, stitching if it is large; and then treat it with some flesh-forming ointment until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the end of the bone is broken at the joint and it is the tip of the bone, then you should insert your finger into the buttock with the left hand, and align the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible by second intention; and then apply a plaster and splint to it, if needed, and wrap it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you find wounds with broken bones in them, then immediately attend to that area, remove what is necessary, and treat the injury with the method described previously until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the broad area (likely referring to the abdomen or a specific anatomical region).
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the broad area when they are broken do not simply communicate at their ends but are split along their length and deviate to the sides; and pain and swelling occur in the location where the fracture has occurred, and movement is impaired when there is a fracture.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you place your hand upon it so that it extends over the fracture until it assumes the shape it should have.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is at the end of it only, then you must immobilize that part as seems appropriate to you by means of equal binding until it assumes its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is along the length or has deviated to the sides, then you make the injured person lie on their back until you are prepared for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have immobilized that part, apply a plaster over it, and then place a splint of wood or cane next to it, and bind it tightly with bandages so that there is no risk of fracture movement or displacement.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And fill the cavity with something that will keep it in place until the bandaging is even and symmetrical, and instruct the injured person to lie on their back or side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If an inflamed abscess is cauterized, then immediately you should cease the extension of it and its restoration until the cauterized abscess is calmed, and pause on what precedes that; and subsequently return to the restoration of it, and strengthen it as is appropriate.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if you encounter bones that are injured or broken, then you should treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of a fracture of the wrist.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjutori is what is between the forearm and the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is fractured, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which is that you take a flat splint of moderate thickness in this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And let them be attached at both ends with two bandages, and then it should be suspended from an elevated location.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And let the patient lie on a mattress; and then place the injured arm, which is fractured, onto the splint until it reaches the midpoint where the curvature of the splint is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then place some heavy object on it, or let the patient extend that arm downward; and then the physician should secure the fracture with his hands, so that the fracture returns to its proper position.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other method is that the patient lies supine on their neck and suspend the arm at the neck with bandages; and then instruct two assistants, one of whom holds what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other holds what is below it; and each of them pulls in their respective directions.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then wrap one bandage around the fracture and another bandage over that, and each of the two assistants should pull on their respective ends.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the muscle's extremity, then wrap half of the bandage over the pad and the other half below the fracture, pulling it tight.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is close to the joint, then wrap the bandage over that area and around that joint.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	And do the same with ease and care. As soon as it is properly adjusted and applied correctly, then tighten that bandage if no swelling occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if swelling occurs, then loosen the bandage within seven days, and wrap it with wool soaked in vinegar and rose water until the swelling subsides, and then tighten that bandage.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method of tightening that bandage is to apply a plaster over the fracture, and then wrap a cloth strip around the plaster; and then adjust the arm using that support, and place your hand on their muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And wrap the cloth and tighten around the support so that the arm is in a fixed position, unless some cause of the broken bone prohibits it.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And now use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And place on the fracture that splint which is the strongest and largest of the other splints; and place between each splint a width equal to the breadth of a finger, and let the length of the splints follow the break with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then place a bandage over the stitches which I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your bandage over the site of the fracture be even tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And the farther apart the fracture is, the bandage should be looser.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And therefore, when you place the splints and apply the bandage as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its proper position, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess may form, then leave the bandage and splints in place for seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then examine the limb in all parts for three days so that no swelling or inflammation occurs at the site; or it is prohibited for food to reach the limb due to excessive bandaging; and therefore, correct all of this as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not loosen the bandage for three days or longer.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient sleep on their back, and their head should be above their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And apply a pad filled with evenly distributed wool over the splint, and at all times of the day or night ensure that the shape of the broken limb is not loosened or dissolved, or that the bandage has become loose; therefore, correct this entirely with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And give the patient food according to the order we mentioned earlier, such that the food is light at first until bandaging begins; and then gradually make the food heavier.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	It is customary for the stitches to remain in place for forty days; and at this time they should be removed, a bath should be given, and medicine should be applied with remedies that correct it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is comminuted, then you should not remove the bandage and stitches for one day or even up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of a fracture of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and radius; one of which is small and is that which lies towards the thumb, and the other is larger and is that which is placed below the smaller one, towards the outer side.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the fracture is of the larger bone only, or of the smaller one, or both together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller bone is fractured above, then the restoration of it is easy, and its healing is quicker.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the bone is fractured below, the fracture is severe, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when both bones are fractured together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is fractured is the smaller one above, then it is appropriate for the physician, during its restoration, to allow a slight extension with ease until it is set.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the larger bone is the one that is fractured, then it is necessary to allow more vigorous extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are broken, now it is necessary for you to make the incision more strongly.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And it is necessary to place the hand in a position for restoration and extension stretched out on a cushion, with the wrist above all parts, so that all other fingers are properly aligned, and the thumb be lower than the others, and the patient lie seated on a chair.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And let there be a cushion in front of him at the height or straight ahead, so that the patient does not have to strain.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And let the assistant extend the arm from below with the patient's hand or a bandage, and another assistant extend it similarly from above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor should align the bone so that it is reduced into its best position as possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if you encounter difficulty in setting the bone, now you must reduce all parts to their proper place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears a separate difficulty that impedes the joint and is not within your hope for restoration, now you should act on it and remove that according to the method we have mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is due to inflammation, I have already made a separate chapter on this, so follow the treatment described there.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, now you should line a cloth with cerot made of rose oil and white wax, and it should be midway between thickness and fineness, and place a finely strained cloth over it so that the abscess is reduced; then remove the cerot and apply a plaster prepared from powdered herbs mixed with egg whites, and afterwards place bandages; and let the bandage placed over that fracture be wider and firmer.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of stars on the arm can be seen in major dispositions, or whether the fracture is in one bone or in two bones simultaneously.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then pause your traction on the site of the fracture as firmly and vigorously, and when you want to perform the traction above or below the fracture, pause the traction a little more gently according to how it was preceded in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the bandage with which it is strengthened should be of medium thickness between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and the bandaging after some days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs for which correction is necessary, such as inflammation that occurs in the limb, then you should immerse the limb in hot water until the inflammation subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the limb not be constrained until it rests, and then resume the traction.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the traction has already been relaxed and the bone is already displaced as it seems, then you should correct all of this with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider whether the nutrition is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive traction, for then you should relax it slightly and let it rest for some days until the nutrition reaches it, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	And if the patient does not experience any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to release them for about 20 days or thereabouts.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And so the hand of the patient is suspended by being tied to something above, and make him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in xxx days or in xxxii days, or at the lightest it is restored in xxviii days, and all of this depends on the disposition of the tissues and the strength thereof.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of a fracture of the thumb and of the said bones.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that to the thumb of the hand and to the joints of the said bones, when they suffer fracture, no other injury occurs except slight damage.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when a fracture or injury occurs to the hand, it is necessary that the patient remain lying flat and facing upwards according to equality, and place the hand extended upon that.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the attendant should extend the broken bones, and the physician should adjust them so that they are properly set.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And now it is necessary to apply a plaster and cotton, unless an abscess has occurred, in which case cauterization may be needed; then place a splint above according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that with cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the fracture is in the parts inside the palm of the hand, then make it appear as a sphere with cloth, and instruct the patient to hold that with their fractured palm; then bind it tightly with cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the splint be of wood wrapped in cloth in which it is raised, so that the wood is applied to the palm; and bind that as needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the bones of the forearm, you should place a splint above and another below the affected part, so that the hand may be open and straight; and immediately apply bandages, as if wrapping the hand around a bowl with the mentioned bandages.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if a fracture occurs in one of the bones mentioned, you should adjust the finger as necessary and immediately straighten it on the palm; and if you wish, place a small splint to raise the fracture and prevent it from being compressed.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	But if the fracture is in any of the others mentioned, such as in the middle bone, or in the index finger, or in the ring finger, you should adjust and bandage it to the corresponding finger; or bind them all together in continuity, which is better; or place a small splint on that one, as we have said for the fingers.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration and immediately after that, the disposition of abscesses and opposing treatments — during the operation — according to what is necessary when any cause of those conditions arises, as it is repeatedly described in the text.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of a fracture of the collarbone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The collarbone, which is often broken, is revealed by sensation according to how it has shifted in the affected area and the most prominent part.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration is done in such a way that one bandage is tightly wrapped above the fracture and another below it, and the patient lies prone on their stomach and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And so the attendant should extend the bandage according to its quality when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	And if it extends towards the root of the spine, then the bandage should be applied to the back at the part above the fracture, so that the extension falls on it, and the other bandage below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the fracture extends towards the back, then the bandage should be applied to the back, and the extension should be to the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And so the physician should equalize the bone on both sides but within such that it is reduced according to its natural appearance and the bone is joined by good union; then it is necessary to apply a plaster and strapping, if an abscess does not occur in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if an abscess does occur, then you should leave it alone for several days until the abscess subsides, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The strapping should be done as follows: you should wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, and fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap the limb so that it reaches to the ankle and the root of the spine.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long strip of cloth between the spine and the limb near the back at the lower parts, and let the ends of the cloth extend from the most prominent part of both sides, and then wrap around the limb and the spine any excess bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place strips of cloth over the spine at the location of the fracture, and place one strip directly over the bone of the limb.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And fill the empty space between the bowl and the container with soft cloths, so that the constriction may be coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin the firm bandaging from above on the place of the fracture with three or four layers, and as much as you distance yourself with the binding from the place of the fracture, your bandaging should be smaller, lighter, and softer.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two ends of the bandage to the sides below until it reaches the nail of the foot, and tighten both ends of the bandages from the other side so that the binding does not be moved from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then place the bandage in such a way that corrosion, pus, swelling, or similar conditions do not occur on the limb; and if any cause of these should arise, cut it off immediately and correct what has happened as soon as possible, as we have said before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a piece of bone that needs to be placed in the bone where it belongs, then you should try to fit it there as best as possible; and if not, fix it and move it, and treat it according to what precedes until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And in some cases, this fracture of the bone is tightened with another bandage, as we have said regarding the helper and the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But during the restoration of the limb in such a manner done, no lameness should occur to the patient; and if it is restored alone or with another bandage applied, then it is necessary that the person will limp permanently.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the swelling lasts for forty days or a few months, and all of this depends on the diversity of constitutions and other conditions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the lower jawbone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the fracture of the lower jawbone usually occurs in this manner, but injuries also happen from blows coming from above.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if the fracture happens, it is often merely a crack or contusion in its parts, and this is due to one or several injuries, and all of this affects the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is such that what is broken in its parts must be equalized, and what is separated must be brought together and joined as much as possible by adjustment, ease, and construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply a plaster and place it over that round bandage if you need one; and wrap it tightly above the fracture as is appropriate.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the precautions we have recommended for other fractures, just as with abscesses and similar conditions, to prevent any accidents that might oppose healing until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the fracture of the chin.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the chin there are two bones, one of which is thick and is called the chin bone; the other is slender and is called the mental bone.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens with some of the types of fracture that happen to both bones of the arm, and by this restoration is made just as the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation of it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if you break both bones together, the curvature is distributed to all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the more delicate bone is broken, the curvature is transferred to the forward parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the thicker bone is broken, you will find it below, and it is from those causes that you are not at fault.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And promptly administer extension and alignment and fixation of the fragments according to that manner.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But it is necessary, if the fracture of the curvature is jagged with multiple fragments, that the extension be gentle and slower, and exercise caution with your approach.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And when there is any cause for operation on the arm regarding the curvature, and when you align the fragments and complete the entire procedure, at that time you will take pieces of wood from a tree that grows below the causes which are set in water, and made similarly from palm branches; choose those with slight roughness, and not too thick, and their length according to the length of the curvature, and place them so that they are closest to the bottom.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap around each one a cloth in two layers according to the length of it, and place one at the side of the curvature on one side and the other on the opposite side, and they should be from the bottom to the lowest part of the body.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Place the two struts in three places at both extremities and at the middle place, for with this structure the arch is prohibited from tilting to the right and left, and it stands in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And now a brace of wood has been administered according to the length of the arch; and let it be placed in such a way that the arch can maintain its mobility.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And especially do this in the case of a fracture, and when it is properly a case of such an injury.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And every day consider the arch and study it carefully based on previous studies, and guard it from abscesses, inflammation, or other similar causes; and when any of these causes occur, then you must act accordingly until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the talus and of the bones of the foot and of the ones mentioned.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	A complete fracture does not usually occur in the talus; but fractures can happen occasionally to the bones of the foot; and to those bones of the foot, few suffer fractures, and instead they mostly experience strains due to their disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot sustain a fracture and the bones are raised above their normal position, then the injured person should place their foot on prepared ground as described.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then place the foot on what is elevated by those bones, and then step on them, press, and bandage them until they return to their proper places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply a plaster and bandage above it, and below the arch of the foot place a small board with two padded ends.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	From around the wound take the flesh which is attached to the descending structure, since you have wrapped that area in cloths and other materials for which you need.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, you then untie the bandage, for you will find the bones either united, or broken or dislocated, and the operation on those cases is as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if anyone says they are broken, then you should reset them and unite them as I recommend to you in the resetting of the bones of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place the broken finger on a splint according to the length of the finger, and leave some space beyond it; and afterwards attach this board, which I recommend to you, to the descending structure.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if what is broken are two or three or more bones, then you place a splint of appropriate length wrapped in linen over each finger, and attach the board at the base of the foot, and let it rest on one end of the board so that it provides good support for the foot.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you not to forget that you should consider all the causes mentioned to you in other fractures and accidents that we have discussed; and prepare yourself for every eventuality with this knowledge.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the pubic bone in women and of the bone of the penis and the shaft of the penis in men.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the pubic bone of a woman is broken, then perform the surgery in a reclined position, and afterwards incline her slightly to one side, and have her held securely behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	Let the midwife fill the basin with cotton wool, and let it be done in the basin as described; then let the woman be placed on her back, and raise the buttocks little by little, for all of this is to ensure that everything is expelled from within, including the remains after delivery as described and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Then place poultices on his back, and when he wants to urinate, raise the cotton to facilitate it, and after urination reduce them and return them according to the method by which they were mixed at the beginning, and then return to his first poultice.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around that time, for he will be restored then.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and tie one end of a reed to it; then insert the entire bladder into his body through an opening, and blow air into the reed until the bladder is inflated inside the body, for this will help the fracture to heal.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then fill it with cotton and keep it for several days as we have recommended, until he is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the hip joint in a man or woman is fractured, proceed with its restoration and alignment as we have recommended for the fracture of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures, and few discover it; mostly for the one who has studied and used this book of mine well; for that fracture signifies to you in the major positions the correct way in restoration and in constraining it, and therefore you understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	Take linen bandages when the penis is grasped, and put the penis in them; then press upon its wrapping of cloth, and it should be wrapped up, and thereafter left for three days or about that time, and it will heal.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of fractured bones when there is swelling.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for one who suffers a fracture with swelling, especially if the bone is large like the femur or the humerus, or similar to them, that you cauterize and incise it immediately if the conditions for cauterization and incision indicate this, as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the swelling discharges blood, then it is appropriate to apply something to arrest this, such as powdering over it powdered turpentine, unless some other cause prevents you from doing so.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess forms, then you should postpone the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, for doing so would cause harmful complications.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin, then it is appropriate to reduce and equalize it with your fingers as easily and with minimal extension as possible.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if extension is not prepared and equalization with your fingers is not possible, then you should reduce it using this instrument; the instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight digits, and its width according to the size of the swelling. It is necessary for the surgeon to have three or four such instruments in different sizes for use in all types of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And let it be round, and let there be little grooves in it so that it is not doubled up; press it upon him during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And let it have a sharp point at which there is a margin in its extremities; and let the upper part be thick tending, and from the middle to the parts divided.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	 And it is called in Greek "labrum voluntas atelarem," which means a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the extremity of it may be placed on the elevated part of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And press it in one place where the bone should return, and let it be balanced with some equation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And thus strive to balance the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of the broken bone is slender, and does not take that tool as a good instrument, then it is necessary that you incise the end of that bone so that the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have recommended, then incise it with that which is suitable among the knives of which we have spoken; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And smooth that which remains on the bone of roughness and small scratches.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction the patient feels intense pain in the tooth, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then do what will be of great benefit to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When you have completed the restoration that you perform on the bone, and now you should dip a cloth in black styptic wine, and properly if it is summer, and do not apply cerot or any other cause which may contain oil over the wound, so that corruption and putrefaction does not occur there.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And immediately after you administer plates at the time of your completion of the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can excise the bruised tissue with scissors and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be careful not to leave the wound on the fracture, for many times unskilled doctors have done this, and it has caused death or a corrosive illness or sepsis in their patients.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the swelling is slight, soft, and different from the swelling of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or it is a bad wound, and you fear some of the harmful accidents we have mentioned, and you feel pain in that area, then do not use plates over that wound, but make a bandage of hard cloths instead of plates and apply it to the wound.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And after one day or two, the wound will begin to form granulation tissue, at which point you remove the cloth that you had placed over it with wine, and then administer medicines, such as those we commonly use to treat wounds, including tetramericon and similar remedies.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is healed and consolidated, and it should be prepared in such a way that putrefaction can run off from it to the lower parts with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If after several days the swelling has not subsided and it is not separated from the bone, then you should know that here you are dealing with small ones because you inquire about the swelling in this way.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those small swellings, those that can be separated and removed and extracted, those that cannot be separated and are left in the limb causing pain, pierce them as you incise them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the swelling becomes inflamed or pus-filled, which is a sign of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary that you pause to choose one of those methods according to what is suitable for the treatment, as preceded in its narrative chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And regarding the matter in which my speech should be focused and you present your effort: when a bone is fractured, it protrudes from the limb as does the bone of the wing and the helper bones and similar to those of larger limbs, and do not presume traction on it, nor its extraction, for after many attempts this may lead to death; leave that inside so it can heal, for it will likely fall out naturally within about 20 or 30 days; and then treat the swelling if visible, otherwise leave it as is.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of knots that occur in the aftermath of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	This knot often occurs in the aftermath of the healing of a fracture, especially near the joints, and it disfigures the shape of the limb; and frequently prevents the limb from performing its natural functions.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer medicines that are astringent such as aloes, myrrh, mira, sercacollo, acrassia, and similar ones; take some of those or all of them, and confess them with either stiptic wine or white hawthorn wine or sweet wine, and apply this over the swelling in lint, and compress it tightly over it.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And let the bandaging be such that you do not loosen it for several days; and then loosen it and replace it with another one until the swelling is reduced; or apply a sheet of lead gently over it, because lead has the property of reducing all that is swollen in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the swelling has already turned into a hardened mass and is causing severe pain requiring immediate removal, then cut it at its highest point, and excise the excess or reduce it with some remedies until it is reduced; and continue treating it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of a fracture when it is set and subsequently the limb is moved gently but according to its natural course.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is set and subsequently the limb is moved gently but improperly, this is done for various reasons: one of which is too much loosening of the bandages and ligatures not as required; or excessive compression of the bandages preventing proper nutrition from reaching the limb; or excessive use of poultices; or improper movement outside its appropriate time; or lack of sufficient blood in the patient's body and weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	For treatment, give the patient food to eat so that the body becomes soft inside where blood may multiply therein; and administer baths; and apply poultices and linen bandages upon it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And apply plasters to the limb, so that the plaster attracts nourishment; or continue rubbing with water-based unguents until nutrition flows and returns it to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of broken bones when they have healed improperly and prohibit their operation in such a way as is necessary.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens to a limb that has already been restored near the healing of its curvature and prominence in the broken bone and knotting, and this is due to the deformation of the shape of the limb, but the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, then there is no need for you to heed the words of one who believes that member to be newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But such stand the words of foolish physicians and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is a reprehensible practice leading to great fear, the sign of which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if limping and knotting are recent, then it is necessary to rub them with water-based unguents in which soothing herbs are mixed, such as mallows, linseed, and melilot, and similar ones; and a plaster should be applied that has a softening effect, well prepared as such; or take mucilage of linseed and mix it with flour of chicken or olive oil, then apply it as a plaster; or take fatty figs and grind them with dove fat, and similarly use medicines that are mentioned for strengthening.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And in some cases it is dissolved by constant gentle friction which is applied to the most fluid parts, and movement of the member should be administered to all parts at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If tortuosity has already occurred and it is made strong and converted into bone and there is a need for treatment with iron, then pus must be evacuated and the continuation of the bone must be dissolved, and what is superfluous from the nodes of that tissue near the bone should be cut with fine instruments, and ease should be provided in this regard with diligence and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On the treatment of dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of any of the joints from its proper place, thereby prohibiting movement, and it distorts the figure of the member, causing severe pain and great injury.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	When a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to immediately attempt its reduction and not delay in doing so, for if it is delayed, the joint becomes inflamed and strong adhesions form, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, it is not advisable to move or stand during the period of inflammation, as movement often causes spasm and severe pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when this occurs, it is necessary to prepare for the incision of the affected area, and then allow rest until the inflammation subsides; afterward, the member should be bathed in hot water and oil, and then reduction should be attempted with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And the entire member should be treated with what will help its memory to return to its proper place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	Here are the bones set in order according to what was mentioned before about fractures; now I enter into the part concerning lesser wounds.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIIIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	When both jaws are dislocated and not locked; the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are moved from their positions slightly and then relaxed a little, or they are completely dislocated and fully separated until they become relaxed at the joint where saliva flows, and the person cannot hold anything nor close their mouth, and the tongue is wrapped within the cheek.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But when the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its proper position by itself with little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is complete and thorough, then prompt reduction must be administered and should not be delayed.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the minister hold the patient's head, and the physician insert one thumb into the root of the dislocated jaw inside the mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or if the dislocation is on both sides, he should place his thumbs together in both roots, while the other fingers remain outside symmetrically; and he instructs the patient to relax their jaws and allow them to move apart from each side; and the physician gently guides the jaw back into place until it returns to its proper location.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated together, then administer warm water and oil for evaporation, until gentle reduction can be performed on both sides and do not delay the reduction of both entirely, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And so when returning to these bandages, and the mouth of the wound is closed but not softened, then sprinkle over those powders from linen dipped in wax, and it should be made of wax and fine oil; and afterwards it should be applied with ease using soft cloths.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their side, and their head be positioned between their two ears, so that it does not turn to either the right or left; and do not force them to chew for any reason; have their food be cut up fine until such time as when the pains are relieved and the jaws are loosened, then let them eat what they wish.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth for eating and drinking and speech until such time as the jaw is loosened and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of both jaws when they are dislocated at some time and not returned to their proper places is difficult, then fevers and constant sweats often occur, and the patient's belly is easily distended, and vomiting pure bile frequently happens.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then you know that it is hopeless; and often the one to whom this happens dies within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the Reduction of the Dislocation of the Clavicle and the Extremity of the Muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The clavicle is not dislocated from the chest inward towards the hands; and sometimes it is dislocated outward, and this is evident by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	For the restoration of the hand, the patient lies on his back and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then press the area with your palm firmly, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then apply the poultice and powder to it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the extremity of the collarbone that is connected to it is not dislocated on any day; therefore, it must be reduced and bandaged as we have said and according to your preparation.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the poultice, powder, and bandage, and instruct the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the upper part to the lower part.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and this happens slowly; and it does not dislocate at the rear parts by the shoulder; and it does not dislocate at the front parts by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is most commonly dislocated outward at the lower parts below the joint, and more frequently in those whose flesh is thin, it easily becomes dislocated; but in those with thick muscles, it remains dislocated with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	If it happens that someone is struck or falls and a muscle becomes swollen with inflammation and is cauterized because it has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then you should proceed with what is necessary for treating it, and now you can begin the treatment of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of it is known when it is in the lower parts near the tendons; therefore, you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal one, for you notice a clear difference among them; and you find at the head of the muscle a concavity and below the tendon the touch of the head of the muscle as if by a man's hand, and the injured person cannot return his hand to its proper place, nor can he move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated from the feet or above, then you immediately notice a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And this dislocation is easily reduced when it is fresh and the injured person is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the practitioner lifts the hand of the injured person to the upper parts; then places his fingers below the tendon and raises the joint firmly back into its place, and the practitioner lifts the hand of the injured person and extends it out straight; then waits until it returns easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return as we have said, even after some days from the beginning of the dislocation, then the injured person should be bathed in warm water and a poultice administered to soften and relax it as if for old contusions, using raisin stones, fenugreek, and melilot in water, which should be applied.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Let the patient lie on their back with their buttocks just below the tip of the leather cylinder that is balanced between levity and strictness, and then the surgeon places his hand on the sphere, raises the muscle upwards, and pulls the patient's arm so that it is not harmed by the parts behind, and another assistant should hold the patient's head so that it is not injured by the parts behind, for it immediately returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce that second method in this manner: that is to have a man present who is taller than the patient, and let him stand on the side of that flank, and insert his hand below the tumor of the patient and raise the tumor towards above so that the patient hangs in the air, and another assistant pulls the patient's arm from behind the patient’s stomach.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is lighter, it is necessary to have something else that can be used for suspending him, so that he may be weighed down by it, because the dislocation immediately returns.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is similarly reduced to another method: that is to fix in the ground a long pole with its top being round like a mortar head, neither thick nor thin, and then place it below the patient; once you have placed over the top of the pole strong cloths, let the patient stand along the length of the pole, and then extend his arm towards behind on one side; and extend his body from the other side with strength, for the joint immediately returns to its place.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction of it is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this treatment: take a pole whose length is two cubits, and its width be four fingers, and the thickness of it should be tapered at the tip according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And above the round head place linen cloths so that the skull does not come into contact with the diseased area.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And let it be paused below the armpit of the patient, and let the arm or hand be extended over the ribcage towards the lower parts, and let the body be wrapped around the helper's arms and hands.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Let the arm be placed on a ladder step according to the latitude, and let the hand be extended towards the lower parts, and let the other side of the body be suspended from the other side, for the joint will soon follow.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument is completed as it is possible for you to do, now place below the armpit a pad of sheep's wool of equal thickness; then place an adhesive prepared from powdered moly and egg white over all the muscle, as mentioned above, and afterwards tightly bandage below the armpit with proper tension. The bandaging should be wound around the plaster, and the hand should be attached to the neck, and left alone, without moving the hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And it is necessary to give the patient little food until the limb is strengthened, for it is easier for them to recover in this way.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then food should be given more freely after seven or five days, and at this point one movement can be exercised; and thus when it is firm and not softened, now it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated due to swelling that occurs or for some other reason, then it should be treated with cautery applied in three tracts, as was said earlier in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after about seven days the bandage is removed and the joint has not healed, and the plaster and strapping are reapplied several times, and it does not heal and cannot be raised to a higher position, then you know that the nerves of it, which run at the head of the muscle, have either been cut or stretched or softened, and understand that the joint will never again be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Regarding the dislocation that occurs from the feet and the mamilla or the parts behind them, the reduction is performed with impulse and extension as needed, until it returns to its place.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And let the other strapping be applied, and care for it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if heaviness in the limb and slowness in its movement occur near the time of healing, then the patient should use baths several times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Neck.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; and it can be dislocated in all directions, but mostly forward or backward. The dislocation of it is not concealed from you as when lying down after a fall or according to some figure it has been dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated neck, this is manifestly shown to you because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor touch its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And you should treat the neck, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it becomes inflamed, for if it becomes inflamed, reduction is difficult, and even if healed, it will not be fully restored; especially when it is in the rear parts, for it is worse than all other types of dislocations, more painful, and often leads to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is such that it can be reduced, is that the hand of it should be extended at two fingers, and the arm of it should be expanded, and the fingers of the physician should be above the joint and below it, and he presses the joint with his fingertips together, or with the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is to the front parts, then it returns thus that he bends the hand with his hand, until he strikes the joint with the palm of his hand.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer vigorous extension and strong movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it in such a way that it is not retracted due to the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then the arm should be rotated from all sides, since it is wrapped in folded cloth long over the hand, or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he anoints it with some oil so that this helps in the lubricity of the joint for ease; and then he presses the joint vigorously until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And after the reduction, it is necessary that he rest on a splint in which there is firmness and stability with linen bandages, and be restrained with moderate compression, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and be left for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it should be loosened; and thus if the joint is formed in its proper place, now you undo the bandage of it and leave it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint should not be stitched, then now apply the plaster and bandage, and leave it for some days until it is healed; and afterward untie that.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	And if it happens that there is severe pain near the reduction of the joint, and its position is in movement, then administer hydration by bath and gentle friction, and compression, until it is calmed; or place on the joint something oily, which is an agent of smooth motion; and afterward bind it, and leave it on the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And afterward remove that, and place it in a bath; and when dry, then you should rub the joint with gentle friction, and afterward apply something oily over it, which is an agent of smooth motion, once, and the second time, and the third time,
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	in the bath instrument, until it is finished.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place on that humid and heated cow's hide over it; and do this for several times, since that is moist and helps to return it to its proper position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation of the elbow joint, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The dislocation of the hand sometimes occurs, and the reduction of such a dislocation is easy, but the opposite is true for other joints. Nevertheless, it is necessary to act with speed in reducing it at the hour when it is dislocated, before swelling or inflammation sets in.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	Here is the translation:
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it must be considered whether the palm is already placed on the abdomen of the hand. If it is diseased, place the back of the patient's hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation precedes from the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be directly on the table so that the doctor’s hand can act upon that proximity of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns quickly, that is good; but if not, then strengthen that area with a bandage over the abscess and leave it be; and do not repeat this action, for otherwise, it will neither endure nor allow you to reduce the pus that passes each day.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint moves according to its tortuousness; and if you notice in the patient no cause for this, except that the hand is weakened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you will know that the nerves are injured or severed, and therefore it should not be treated by strengthening but rather with cauterization near the location of the injury and fortifying what remains without attributing it to a specific cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	When the treatment has been properly applied and returned as expected, then place on the bandage which we have recommended, and leave it in place and strengthen it for five days; after that, remove it and allow the hand to be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	However, if the movement of the hand is restricted and you encounter any gravity in it, then apply that area with warm water and friction several times until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the said joints.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	In some cases, the said joints are dislocated completely.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	When a finger is dislocated either towards the thumb or towards the palm, straightaway hold the finger and gently push it back into place.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then hold the tip of the finger, and suspend it above the part to which it is dislocated, and leave it like this for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and extend it until it is properly bandaged on that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, wrap it as described, and do not stop unwrapping it during the day and exercising its movement, and wrap it at night; and do this for several days until it is strong.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same for this if it is dislocated toward the palm of the hand, and wrap it in that part as you would for the first operation until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And do the same when it is dislocated to other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the spinal vertebrae.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs to any of the spinal vertebrae in the back or neck and they move out of their proper places, then there is no cure for this, as death is feared for the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	The sign of this is that the patient's excretion occurs without their will and they cannot control it; often, certain parts of the body become numb, such as one or both sides of the body or one or both arms; or a vertebra has moved from its place, as sometimes it moves and sometimes there is a displacement in four directions.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Thus it is exposed at the posterior parts and is named gelbozitat.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The treatment for this is to consider whether the gelbozitation occurs due to pus, because in that case there is no cure and there is no remedy for it.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in the case where it comes from trauma or impact or something similar to these, the Ancients described the methods of treatment at length, which I will summarize for brevity; but little excuses me from excess due to my closeness to understanding and explanation, with which I have explained and formulated this out of instruments different from those with which I would show this and explain that.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in the case of gelbozitation occurring at the front part of the feet, there is neither onset nor cure for it; and similarly with those made on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And those are not cured except for the one that occurs precisely as I recount.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient lie on their back near a wall, extended below a padded support so that the feet are not pressed.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And place a straight pole, planted in the ground at the end near the head, and another pole around the feet at the other end of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the attendant holds one pole, and it is not fixed in a pit; and another attendant holds the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap a bandage around the head of the patient and under the armpits tightly; extend the end of the bandage to the pole that is behind the head, and secure it there; and then stretch another bandage over the hips near the buttocks; and then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other pole that is behind the feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And so the minister shall extend the bandages at the part of the stump, and let not the two stumps and their respective bandages be moved from the places in which they are fixed, but rather let them not be fastened as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the physician shall place his palms on the strong part of the spine until it returns, or he should place upon that one table and then adjust upon the table his own weight until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return by this method, now take a table whose width or length is about three arms' lengths, and dig into the wall near the patient a place where the end of the table can be inserted.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the middle of the table on the spine, and the physician places his weight on the other end, and gently pulls until the spine is compressed and returns to its proper place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open the ring which is revolved on the hand; and place yourself on the ground with the patient's head at the end of two poles, the length of each being one arm's length, and behind his head place two similar poles in the same manner. The distance between each pole should be a palm's length, and ensure that each ring is firmly attached to the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be one round pole in which is the ring, and it should be revolved in the two rings at the ends of the two poles.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a ring in which the pole is formed, the length of which is one palm where it revolves; and on the two other poles there is something similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Unbind the bandages that you have tightly applied to the patient’s feet at the time when you were supposed to remove his head covering, and the bandages that you have tightly applied to his armpits at the time when you were supposed to remove his foot coverings.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	At each turn, there should be a minister who holds the turn with his hand, and the surgeon should straighten the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And once the spine is returned to its proper position and the area has been straightened, now it is necessary to apply an inflammatory plaster on a cloth of henbane, and then stoppered; and afterwards place over the plaster strips of wood whose width should be three fingers or around that size, and the length should cover the area affected by inflammation, and above the part of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then bind it with the bandage we have mentioned, and let the patient use delicate nourishment until he is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any inflammation in the area at the end of the healing process, now it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and soothe over a long period, as we have recommended; and a piece of lead may also be applied to that location.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes inflammation occurs at the end of the vertebrae in the back, and it is caused by that dislocation; and that bone is one for which caution must be exercised when applying this medicine, because it could easily lead to fatal consequences.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the attachment of the muscle are involved only in dislocation and not in what affects other joints with slight movement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, which are dislocation towards the interior parts, or towards the exterior parts, or towards the front parts, or towards the rear parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is most commonly dislocated towards the interior parts, and rarely towards the front parts or towards the rear parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation towards the interior parts is that when you adjust the leg of the patient on the affected side compared to the healthy side, it is longer and the heel is more prominent than on the healthy side, and the patient cannot bend their leg behind the neck, and this location is where an abscess would be cauterized, so the head of the bone has already reached here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of one to whom dislocation occurs towards the exterior parts is that the symptoms of it are contrary to these symptoms.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of one to whom dislocation occurs towards the front parts is that when raising the leg according to its completion, it does not bend due to pain in the heel, and if they attempt to walk, they cannot do so towards the front; and their urine is retained and their swallowing is difficult, and they must walk on their heels.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of one to whom dislocation occurs towards the rear parts is that they cannot raise the heel, nor can they bend the part in front that bends the throat, and their leg is shorter than the other, and swallowing is difficult, and the head of the bone is at that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The final reduction of these types of dislocation is that you consider, at this time, if the dislocation is old and ancient, which already has been there for some time, then you administer reduction according to its position; now it is not in that cure entirely; and thus no hope should be placed in it.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In the case where the dislocation is recent and belongs to one of the four types of dislocations, now you should consider turning the joint and extending it to both sides within and without, and move it from side to side, for it easily returns to its place and does not require other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	However, if it does not return in this manner, now you should prepare strong assistants and extend the limb of the patient from below or at its base, or use a bandage that lies above the limb near the root; and another assistant extends the hand of the patient upwards so as to place their hands below the joints; and then apply a lion's bandage tightly over the joint, and have another assistant hold the end of the bandage.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And this extension of the limb or the part inside towards the angle of the shoulder, or from behind to the side.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And this extension of all these should be done at once while the patient is raised off the ground and remains hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is common to all four types.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And thus if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and if not, now it is necessary for all types what I will say about its proper treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the shoulder when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is towards the inner parts, the patient should be placed on their back; then place the bandages over the armpit in the spot between the head of the humerus and the position below the clavicle; then extend the bandage from under the axilla to as far out as possible along the collarbone.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another strong minister should take hold of his arms, and firmly grasp the large part of the dislocated shoulder and pull outward forcefully, for that causes it to return to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this particular type is the easiest to cure among those in which this member is reduced compared to the other types.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if it is excused upon you and you do not obey the exercise regimen for this type of treatment at all, then now it is necessary to bind both sides of the patient with a strong, light bandage on both heels and both toes.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each be four fingers, and let the diseased shoulder be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then the patient should be suspended above the top of the post and held by the hand; and let the distance from him to the ground be two arm lengths.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong young man to pull on the head of the humerus, and let another young man hold the patient, while the other young man pulls the arm with great strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the reduction of the shoulder when it is dislocated towards the outer part, the patient should lie on his back as we have recommended for treating injuries; and the bandage should be tightly wrapped around the affected shoulder properly and over the feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Place the poles as follows: one at the feet and the other at the head; then place adjusted poles on each side of the ridge that has been set up, covered with moist cloths so that the patient is not harmed by the pole being among the objects beneath him, for you must prevent the extension from being pulled down in the lower parts.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each attendant should extend to his side, and the surgeon, with his hand, will adjust the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Thus, if you obey the reversal, it will be very good; and if not, place it carefully as we have said for jaundice, adjusting it accordingly.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But make sure that the patient lies on their side comfortably.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then the board should be extended quickly, and it follows this described narration about the ridge; and the surgeon places the palm of his right hand on the patient's side, and with that compression uses the other hand to extend it to the rear part towards the back.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the rear parts, then it does not need for the patient to be extended to the rear parts and raised off the ground; rather, they should be placed on a hard surface, just as it is necessary when the hip joint is dislocated outwardly, as we have said about positioning the body between two boards; and it is on their back with the limbs extended, as we have said, for there is no harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it is necessary to administer compression with the board at the location of the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Thus, when the reduction is complete as it should be — and the sign of the reduction of the bone is not hidden from you, which is that you extend the patient's limb and when you see those equalities and the patient extends his or her good limb and expands this for an excuse, then you know that the member as it should be has been returned — and then you adjust two things and pause with bandaging and extend a bandage so that the width is not diminished in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then loosen the bandage and the dressing, and compare one limb with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Now, if you see those equalities honestly, then you know that the dislocation has already been fixed, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of inflammation, then you return and dress that area, and extend it according to your initial structure, and let it be for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then loosen that area, and have the patient delay in walking on it for several days until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward, inward, and downward toward the back; it cannot be dislocated forward.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that you command the patient to apply their limb to the body; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And for the restoration of all kinds of this is that you should cut open the patient correctly; thus spread out his thigh or leg if possible. Stick your hand to his face and place your foot between his thighs, and then attach the end of his penis with your palms, and hold those firmly over the end of his penis with strength, and another assistant stretches his leg so that the penis returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of recovery for him is that his leg adheres to the body without laborious effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply a plaster to that and make the leg adhere to the body, and then bind those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then unbind them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not allow the patient to walk for several days until he is healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of it by you is unnecessary, now administer strong extension with the instruments of which in the treatment of the hip preceding narration.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of dislocation of the thigh.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The thigh sometimes is displaced by slight movement, and sometimes is dislocated completely, and the dislocation of it is done either towards the interior parts or towards the exterior parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of it is that you see the thigh swollen towards the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the treatment of the slight displacement is easy restoration, and it should be extended with ease by pressure and should be bandaged so that it returns to its place.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	In the treatment of the hand when it is dislocated for the second time, make sure to have the patient lie straight, and let there be a strong and capable attendant behind him at his mid-side.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And place yourself with your right hand on the uppermost part of his foot, and with your left hand on the lower part of his foot at the location of the joint.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And pull the foot towards yourself with your right hand, and grasp it with your left hand for two moments, and then extend your left hand; and press the bones of the foot with your right hand gently but firmly.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this two times as we have described.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then press the bones of the foot gently but firmly for the third time, and you should be at the joint.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	If the hand returns to its proper position in one attempt or two following this method, and if the movement of the hand is equalized, it is good; otherwise, immediately repeat the operation, as it has not returned.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you are prevented from reducing it as we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and set a strong roller firmly in place between his shoulders, and let him rest against it, and you should wrap a cloth around him so that he does not move.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And the attendant holding the patient’s body, and another attendant extends the foot with his hands or with a strap that lies across the heel of the foot; and then each attendant pulls against the extension on their side, and the roller should be positioned between the patient's sides restraining him, so that his body is not drawn towards the parts behind during the extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Here is the translation:
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And so when the dislocation is returned and the health of its reduction is declared to you, pause the plaster and wrap it very tightly, and tie the limb to the bench.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful to avoid or protect the nerves which are behind on the heel, so that the bandage over them is not too tight and does not injure them severely.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave that for two days or three; and if the bandage has softened, wrap it again.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then untie that on the third day or on the fourth, and forbid the patient from moving for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if the patient is forced to move before that time, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not dissolve and become corrupted, and after that it will not receive proper treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if an abscess occurs that requires cauterization, then you should administer according to the guidelines of our narration in another place concerning treatment and application, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Said Ankle Bones.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Ensure that the one who is dislocated lies with little extension without working; and this is not difficult, but rather easy.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in some bones of either foot, then you should have the patient lie on the ground or on a table in a position as if they were sitting.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand on one foot, and place your weight over the area where the joints are, and then press with your foot firmly until it returns to its proper position, and ensure that it appears level and does not protrude in an elevated location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	After the pause, place the foot on a board that will span the entire foot, which has two ends, and then strengthen that with proper structure and firmness for three days; then untie that and allow it to rest with movement for ten days, until it is strengthened and its recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	About the kinds of dislocation that are made by injury or fracture or any combination thereof.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When some cause of those occurs, and you persevere in the treatment of it and in its restoration, many times death results.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And because of this, one should not trust in the treatment of it unless it is a wise person in the art, with long practice, merciful and pious, neither hasty nor presumptuous; and who uses at the beginning medicines that only reduce swellings, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, but to him whom you hope will bring salvation from perdition, or relief from illness, and in whom appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then strive to perform the reduction for him at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes a swollen abscess.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the limb returns as we want, immediately administer a regimen that reduces swelling and treats the injury with what is appropriate from among dry ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is with a fracture and occurs in bones that are separated, then you should manage their stabilization, and do as we have said regarding simple injuries, dealing with them in the places where they occurred.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear as I have preceded my preaching; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and more healthful will be your true body which you shall see in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Albucasis perfectly, for which God be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
