Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, my children, now that I have completed this book, which is the last of the sciences of medicine, by the completion of its contents and by the exposition of it and by the clarification of it, in my view I have complicated for you to love this treatise, which is part of what I do with my hands, which is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation with my hands has been abandoned in our region and in our time is entirely deprived, except that barely the science of it remains visible; and there are no more than a few small descriptions of it in the books of the Ancients, which have changed many things to errors and hesitation among those who understand it, weakening its force and the art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it is clear to me that I should revive this treatise according to the method of exposition and explanation and abbreviation; and so that it comes with the forms of cautery tools and other instruments used in the work as mentioned by adding explanation and preparation, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the reason why a good craftsman is not found with his hands in our time is that the art of medicine is extensive, and one must be trained in the science of anatomy, which reveals knowledge of the functions of the members and their forms, as well as their connections and separations; and understanding of the bones, nerves, and muscles, their number and extension; and of the pulsating veins and stationary ones, and the places where they are found.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this reason Hippocrates said that in name there is much, but in the work little, and especially in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	This is what we have already said at the beginning of this book; for whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy cannot be excused from falling into error by which men are killed, as I have seen too many of them, for some are formed in this science and get themselves out of that lack of knowledge and experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor who had to incise an abscess in the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed out, and the woman died as a result.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who claimed that he would remove a stone from a man who had been suffering from it, and the stone was large. When he came to do it, he pulled out that stone along with part of the bladder, so that on the third day the man died.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I had already concluded that it was impossible to remove that stone, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew for certain that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who was paid wages by a duke of our land to perform surgery, and he attended to a black castrated man who had a fracture in his skull. Because of the doctor's ignorance, he exposed the fracture over the wound with cotton and splints in a strong structure but did not leave room for drainage.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And he loosened it according to his desires, and soon after he dressed the wound again. He then left it like that for several days and commanded us to remove the bandage; and thus it was that the skull and the flesh became abscessed, and he came to ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	Thus he calls to him, and prepares to loosen the bandages, and when calm is achieved he begins to relieve his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But when corruption was confirmed in the member, because he could not restrain it, and it did not cease to spread the corruption within the member until the patient was in danger.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another surgeon who punctured a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated after some days, until the magnitude of its wickedness was evident to him, the lord of it.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason is that the melancholic humor in cancer is pure, therefore it does not need to reach every part of the body entirely, but rather remains in the member which suffers from being wholly affected by it.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, my children, it is necessary for you that the operation be planned in two aspects: one is an operation associated with health, and the other is work where there is risk even in the best conditions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already mentioned this in every place in this book where an operation occurs with error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to keep this in mind and avoid that, so that the pages do not find a way to speak ill of you and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And so take up your arms with diligence and the protection of God, and your patients with skill and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best path by God's grace to lead to health and praiseworthy success, and leave behind the terrible diseases that are hard to cure, and stand firm against what makes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and reputation does not escape you: for it remains more to your glory, and even more in this world and forever in your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Wound treatment in some monastic surgeries:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat illness badly, for then bad doctors are not named.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And thus I have dedicated this book in three parts.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered about the head, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cauteries, and of what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, about cutting and piercing, and about suction cups, and plasters, and the extraction of arrows and similar things, all chaptered and ordered in the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, about restoration and dislocation, and the treatment of twists and similar conditions; a chapter ordered about the head, and in the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	About cauterization with fire and with sharp medicine and recalling the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	There begins the treatise of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I shall speak of the quality of the movements of that cautery and of its ingredients, and in what condition cauterization is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the speech about the quality of the movements of cauterization and its ingredients is long and verbose, subtle by science, and hidden as a secret; many wise people have spoken much about it, and they are often at odds with each other. For me, a little of their speeches suffices to avoid prolongation.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And so I say that cauteries conform to all complete structures universally, whether they are made of material or without material, with the exception of two structures, which are tail-like structures without material.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the dry and material-tail structure, they become dehydrated; for some say that cauterization is beneficial for this, while others say the opposite, that cauterization is not appropriate in a disease characterized by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is hot and dry, and it is inappropriate to treat a tail-like and dry condition with something as hot and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And he who says the opposite of that is wrong, because cauterization can be beneficial in all tail-like and dry diseases that occur in human bodies, for when you compare the condition of a person's body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find that the human body is cold and moist.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say with the words of that person, that I have already discovered this through some experiences myself.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But I do not mean that one should rely solely on what has already been expounded and exercised in the chapter of cauterization through previous practice, without knowing the diversity of human structures and the disposition of diseases in their seasons, and the causes of those diseases, as well as their symptoms and the time span involved.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other structures, there is no need for fear, especially in cold and humid diseases, because all doctors are now in agreement about those, and they do not disagree on the benefit of using cauterization in such cases.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, my children, that the secret of healing through cauterization with fire and its goodness lies in the fact that fire is simple, and its action affects only the member being cauterized without harming other parts of the body except for minor damage.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	Here is the translation:
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	May the fire, by its exalted nature and goodness of substance, do nothing but cause superfluities to overflow. And it is known to us through experience and length of service in studying this art concerning the truth of causes; and for that reason I excuse myself from the length of speech. And if not that it would not be read in my book, at this place I hide from you secrets about the fire, and its quality in operation on bodies and expulsion thereof by which you expel diseases, with a philosophical demonstrative speech, which would sharpen your wits.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that those who disagree about the time when it is convenient to perform cauteries pause at the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cauteries are convenient at all times, because the harm caused by accidental circumstances of time is submerged in the benefit brought about by what is attracted through cauterization, and even more so if the cautery is for pains or necessary pain, strength and swellings, which cannot tolerate delay due to fear of malice, which is worse than a small harm entering through the time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And this does not concern your understanding, or, children, what is valued only by the common people and foolish doctors is that for the disease which is cured by cauteries there is no delay at all times, and they pause at that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the reason is not thus as they think, because cauteries are nothing but a replacement for medicine that alters the complexion and dries up the humidities which are the cause of pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But may it be that superfluous cauteries are above medicine due to the speed of their validity and the virtue of their operation and the greatness of their power.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that his illness may return at some time according to the condition of the patient and the location of his illness, and its nature, and what has been prepared in him by the accumulation of superfluities within him, and what he has acquired through food and similar causes; but if the illness for which cautery was administered is a subtle one involving few superfluities and humidities, such as dental cautery for pain and the like, it may not return, though this applies to minor cases.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And the common saying is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is said by practitioners, not because those who understand it think it to be a cure beneficial to medicine or any other cause before applying cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer methods of cure for certain illnesses, and those remedies do not suffice, and then at the end of the treatment, cautery is administered, and it proves effective.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And here in what follows, I mean that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which the common people and foolish doctors have.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the excellence of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the location for cautery does not matter, which is not absolutely true, because I have already experienced and proved that it works differently on different bodies; cautery with gold can be good and better than iron as others claim. However, when you perform cautery using fire with gold, it is not clearly defined to you, because the hardness of gold requires careful adjustment regarding quantity, and it prepares to receive friction. If you apply heat over it by fire, the gold will melt due to the heat, and if you place some thin sheets in the fire, the craftsman can perform the cautery according to that condition.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And thus is made the cautery of iron, which must be applied gently and gradually in accordance with the correctness of the procedure.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have arranged this chapter on cauteries according to the chapters, and I have placed those of the head among the parts, so that I alleviate the questioning of him who seeks what he desires.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cautery for headache due to cold and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery is applied to the headache caused by cold and moisture, which are the two causes of such an accidental condition. It is also used for a profuse running sore called "corissa" in the head, cheeks, and ears, excessive sleepiness, toothache, gout, and generally all illnesses that arise from coldness, such as paralysis, stroke, and similar conditions.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The method of this cautery is as follows: First, command the patient to evacuate their bowels with a laxative medicine for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient and their age and usual habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then have him sit between two chairs and place his hands on his own feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the palm of your hand on the shaved part of the head near the bridge of the nose between the eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But when the heat of your hand has reached that place, mark it with ink, and then prepare the olive wood cautery, which is made as follows:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And so pause there about the marked spot until it descends, in such a way that the skin may be gradually stretched, and you turn it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand gently and look at the spot, and if you see any amount of bone already exposed, like the quantity of grain in a thimble, then raise your hand, and if not turn your hand to that tool, another of those, if it is chilled, until you can see the bone which I have told you about.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the spot and let that remain for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then pause over the embedded wound on the border and let that remain inside until the burn scar is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the spot with a four-component ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they say that when the plague boils burst open, it is better and more beneficial to let them drain.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them say that the cord should be cauterized down to the bone, and the cautery should remain until it adheres to some part of the bone.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then remove what is adhered to the bone, and then treat it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that with the cautery it should reach the deepest part, until it presses strongly into the bone until the bone melts, and this is the way to cauterize slightly:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that spot emanates the vapor of the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let the wound be treated for some time until it is healed and consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two species of cautery used universally, but only on certain individuals out of fear; and leave that, in my opinion, it is better to heal with care, when possible; for the head is delicate due to the solution of continuity as we have testified regarding other members, and especially when the patient's constitution is cold.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first species of cautery is safer and better, in my opinion; and with that, one can heal and bring about health.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of cauterizing the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head and this is prolonged in the patient, and if you have used plasters, compresses, decoctions, poultices, ointments, cataplasms, and various other remedies, especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery which I mentioned but to no avail due to any of those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is strong in its constitution; and if it is not cold and does not have much moisture, then at that time cauterize with another type of cautery below that one a little.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that area above the crown of their head with cautery until the pain is relieved.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut open the pain and expose the amount of bone that we have described and cauterize that area with a cautery at the back of the head in the place called "vas" — which is the location where the vein is situated.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And take care in this, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will thereby discover great pain different from the pain of all other cauteries of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I will describe this cautery in its place, for it is appropriate that the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Chapter Three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On Cauterization of Non-Ancient Hemorrhoids.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When severe pain occurs in the part of the head, or if there is persistent pain inside the eye, one should evacuate with medicines that purify the head, and administer the other treatment which I have described for diseases; and if this does not benefit, then cauterization should be performed in two ways: either with a sharp medicinal cautery or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But if you are performing a cautery with a burning medicine, then take a piece of cloth, soak it in the medication, and hold its extremities from both ends.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then cut into the area of the pain on the temple with a lancet slightly so that it is done in a hidden place, where it is concealed.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then apply pressure to it with bandages by tightening them properly, and leave it like that for three hours; then loosen the bandages and remove the cloth, and leave the wound open for two or three days, and then place a poultice over it soaked in butter until the area becomes warm.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Let the treatment be applied until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, use some of the medicines mentioned in the twelfth chapter on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But when you apply cauterization, do it in this manner: prepare the cautery fire, of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a nail clamp, for its head has the shape of a nail with some curvature, and in the middle part there is a small protrusion.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then apply it to the location of the pain, and hold your hand — so that the artery below is not adhered to — and move the tool gently little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount that adheres due to the stiffness of the tissue is such that it exceeds half of it, raise your hand so that the artery below is not adhered to, so that there is no flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak cotton in salt water and apply it to the location, and leave it for three days; and afterwards apply dry cotton around it, and treat with internal medications until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize at the end of the radial bone according to the cautery method, and be careful not to cut the artery in this proper but non-traditional procedure.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On Cauterization of an Ancient Ulcer.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat an ulcer with what we have said about previous treatments and the divisions of diseases, and if it does not improve, and sometimes due to the severity of the disease what has been mentioned of the first cautery with medicine or fire is insufficient, then you should ignite the radial cautery until it becomes white-hot. Place it on the area of pain along a line that is half the length of your finger or slightly more, and after placing your hand carefully, press firmly to ensure it does not cut the artery but reaches the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the jawbone, which is malformed due to mastication, and that the lizard not adhere and the nerves which move it, and that it not become spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is severed, because in its severing there is fear, and especially for him who does not know what he is doing and is not careful and experienced; and leave the operation to him at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And here I will come to the recall of the regimen of blood flow accidents from the artery according to the usual way, in its place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see from this illness that these cauteries are not sufficient and the patient's condition is tolerable, cauterize in the appropriate place of the head as we have recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you proceed, administer the cauteries which we have mentioned in the chapter on the rupture of arteries with a two-edged cautery, and this is the best form of cauterization and more effective.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the Cauterization of Ear Pain.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain in the ear occurs due to friction and is treated with laxative causes and with the other treatment I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain does not subside, now use cauterization. This is the one called puncta, whose form is as follows:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And bring the puncta near the fire, and move it around the entire ear as a wheel turns, or in the vicinity of each part if the pain is in that part.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Lengthen the cautery of the edge of the ear little by little until you have marked the place with it.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery touches these points throughout the ear, and which one of them, and then treat the places inside until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cautery of the turtle.  
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The tumor which is cured without cauterization is nothing but of the kinds that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization for the type that results from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that kind of tumor with incisions and capillary purgatives and gargle remedies, and if your cure is not effective, then it becomes necessary to cauterize the disease with three applications: the first at the root of the ear, and the second a little further in its temple area, and the third you should apply to the junction of both lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cauterization on the opposite side of the affected part, because softening occurs only in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cauterization is that you cauterize there with the cautery on the right side of the uppermost part of the ear, and a little above the horn of the head, and in another temple area, the length of which should be according to the length of your thumb, and then move your hand with the cautery until half the quantity of the tumor is burnt.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a special type of knife, the form of which is described above.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, even finer is that which you see somewhat like this; and it should be a knife instead of excessive coarseness, a bit refined.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with the liquid that was previously prepared until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On cauterizing ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said and do not cause fever in the patient, then cauterize that area with four cauteries: on top of all the temples; one caustic at the middle part of the head, as we have said; and one caustic on the occiput.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cauteries is done as mentioned above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and this is better; and proceed with its treatment as appropriate.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On cauterizing forgetfulness caused by fainting.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Give the patient large doses and pills at the beginning to purify the mind.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then shave the patient's head completely and place on the occiput a plaster as described in the chapter on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And place it several times, for that is the method of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to the order of the method that I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if healing occurs well with those methods; otherwise, then perform three cauteries on the rear part of the head, which are located descending from the most superior part of the head towards the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Between each cautery, wait until the swelling of the finger subsides, and then proceed with the cautery using water as described.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you decide to proceed and the pain is tolerable, then perform the cautery in its proper place; and if you want stronger treatment, then apply the cautery over both sides.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Proceed with the treatment until it is healed; and perform the olive-shaped cautery as described earlier.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cautery for parasites and the softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Proceed with the cleansing of the head using scissors and water as we have said; then shave the patient's head, and afterward apply the cautery in its proper place on the head, and also apply it all around the edges of the head, and at the back part of it, and three cauteries along the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary for the illness of softening the body to do so and the patient can tolerate it and the illness is severe, then apply the cautery with four cauteries along the vertebrae of the back, and finally apply one in the middle of the lower back where it meets the buttocks, and lift the skin slightly.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Proceed with the treatment until it is healed, and this should be an olive-shaped cautery.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cautery for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	An epileptic should not be cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And so you should clean the brain when it is necessary at the beginning of the operation and in the other treatment which we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and can tolerate the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the medicines, then administer gargle and mouthwash which clean the brain, before that for several days, with the improvement of the food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the patient's head, and afterwards cauterize that with a cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the occiput, and on each side of the head apply cauterization.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize that with the cauteries which I have described, having paralysis and relaxation of the body over the cervical vertebrae and the thoracic vertebrae.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let it be an olive pit cautery as was described previously.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then use a gentle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On Cauterization of Melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and thick phlegm, then cauterize that with the cauteries which we have mentioned, having paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is an excess inclining towards melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give them something to drink that cleanses their brain according to what was mentioned previously in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Cut off the diseased part of the head, and then make an incision properly around the circle, and then place that in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the diseased part is six inches wide, and it should be held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a lotion; it is more suitable to use the grease from sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that on the fire with moderate warmth prepared according to measure, which the patient can endure when it is applied.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place that in the middle of the head within the circle, and let it be rubbed in.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this with the diseased part once a week, and follow the regimen until it is healed; or if you prefer, cauterize that in small points according to what is necessary, but hold your hand with a cautery so ordered: this is a special kind of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then place that piece soaked in grease or in chicken fat.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cautery for water descending in the urine.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it has been declared to you the beginning of water in the urine by the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient that which purifies the urine, and protect it from all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And have that person sweat in a bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then he orders the one who is cutting the head to shave the head, and cauterize that area where cauterization should be done in the proper place on the head; and then cauterizes that area with two cauteries over two temples if it is the beginning of pus discharge from both eyes, or of one cheek if it is the beginning of pus discharge from one eye.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut around the area where the cauteries are all the veins and arteries that approach the neck; and place the cauteries at a distance in the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And guard against blood flow when it is being cauterized; and if you see blood flowing, stop the area with some medicine, which is possible for you to use.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And here comes the knowledge of vein extraction and the ligation of those veins and caution against blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And in some cases, it is cauterized on the neck behind two bones with two cauteries produced accordingly.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the eyes are old and constant due to veins and arteries that are in a visible part of the head, and it is verified that this is an excess of cold phlegm, then cauterize that area with the cautery which we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of pus discharge into the eyes, and with one cautery in the middle part of the head, and with two cauteries in the neck behind two temples, and with two cauteries in the neck behind two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need to add something, then cauterize that area across the entire cheek of the eye above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On cauterizing the foulness of the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat him as we have said in the division and he does not benefit from your treatment, then prepare and give the sick person hot decoctions to drink for three nights; afterwards, shave his head and cauterize the affected area with a moderate cautery made of olive oil.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that area with a rose cautery using two cauteries above the eyebrows, slightly beyond the hair.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to burn that area.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the rose cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On cauterizing to soften the eyelids.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid is softened due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is the form of it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do so, cauterize that area above the eyebrows slightly with two cauteries in total, and let them extend towards the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be proportional to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand when using the cautery, but rather let a third part of the eyelid adhere.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of cautery of the eyelid when the hairs turn inward and pain occurs.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the eyelashes turn inward and cause pain, cautery can be performed in two ways: either by actual burning or by using a combustible medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If the cautery is done with fire, instruct the patient to trim their eyelashes as one would for a normal haircut, ensuring they are lengthened and even; and if pain persists due to their growth, then wrap the eyes in a bandage so that nothing interferes until the lashes regrow.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	When they have grown and are even, then instruct the patient to place their head in a comfortable position, and gently apply over the eyelid of the affected eye a mark resembling a leaf shape, with the beginning of the mark near the lashes.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then place a cotton ball soaked in egg white or mucilage of fly wings on the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then perform the cautery according to this method.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize gradually over the marked figure in small strokes until the surface of the area, which is like a myrtle leaf, is fully burned through.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of success in this procedure is that you see the eyelid of the eye becoming contracted and the lashes elevated away from the surface of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and wash the area for three days, and afterward place a cotton ball on it until the scar is remedied.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And for its treatment apply those plasters which will heal it.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If the hair returns because of some cause affecting it and the eyelid is softened, now make another attempt at cauterization over that area just as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hair grows on the eyelid below, now cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural position and healed so that the hair does not touch the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cauterization and medicine should be such that you instruct the patient to pluck the hair until they are lengthened and healed, and then make from paper or cloth the shape of a myrtle leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take known soap and one ounce of any living oil, and mix these ingredients well, and apply this quickly so that it does not dry; and then spread this over the paper made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place this on both eyes; and place under each eye cotton soaked in albumen, and have the patient's head in your lap.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place your finger on the medication and press it gently so that the patient feels the burning of the medicine, for this burning is like that of fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And as long as the burning sensation persists, then remove the medicine and press it with your finger; when the burning stops, then rinse the eye with water; and now check if the eyelid is raised as it should be after rinsing, whether you need to treat it with fire or incision, for this indicates that it is well done; and if not, return the medicine to the place where it was not applied before it darkens until it heals your operation and contracts the eye.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation:
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	It is necessary for you to guard your operation with vigilant diligence so that no part of the medicine falls into the eye, and if the eyelid after some days becomes softened and any cause of hair growth appears in the eye, then repeat your medicine upon that place where the eyelid has become softened, and properly as you did at the beginning, and soon it will be healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of the myrtle leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you should know that the eyes of people vary in size and smallness, and therefore according to this is made your adjustment.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And the path to rectitude will not be hidden from one who studies in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On Cauterization of a Fistula That Is in the Lacrimal Sac of the Eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not refer to your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize according to this method: instruct the patient to place his head in your lap, and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or shake.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place a piece of cloth soaked in egg white or in a poultice of bran over the eye of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cautery, which has this form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is made of copper, similar in shape to a reed or an eagle's feather, with one end where the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, insert it into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to come out like a probe.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But the one that is concave is better for the present purpose.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and let it drain and dry it out.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, now cut it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then press on it with the cautery which should be well heated, and hold it there for a moment but do not bring the cautery too close to the eye, so that you do not accidentally burn your hand or cause harm, and now place the cautery on the flesh around the area and cauterize it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so if at the beginning of your cauterization it penetrates to the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cauterization once or twice, as needed; and leave it like that for three days, and then press on the wound gently and around it apply a drying agent until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if after these days it has not healed, then apply a sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and proceed as appropriate according to the relevant chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula which the ancients first described: enter the location of the fistula and dilate it, and then place a thin cautery in that fissure whose form resembles the fistula: And pour into it one ounce of molten lead; and hold your hand gently but firmly, and do not move too much so that the molten lead does not reach the eye; and ensure that you press on the affected area gently, either in egg white or water, as the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, that is well; but otherwise, it is necessary to administer traction of the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to how it will come into its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On Cauterization of the Fistula of the Anus.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Fissures often occur in the lips, and more commonly in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment is not effective, then use a small knife-shaped cautery according to this form that will be described:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let the thickness of it be according to the fineness of the blade.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Apply that hot iron carefully to those fissures until the cautery reaches the base of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ceroti until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On Cauterization of Fistula in the Mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess occurs in the uvula or on the palate or in the gums around the teeth, and then it becomes inflamed, and subsequently ruptures, and is neglected, and a fistula is formed, and when you treat this and the treatment does not succeed, then it is necessary for you to prepare a cautery according to the size of the fistula, and then place that heated cautery into the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron reaches the base of it, and do this once or twice; and then treat it with what we have said about treatment until it heals.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	Therefore, if the sinew is cut and it heals, that is good; but otherwise, it is necessary to discover the place and remove the corrupted bone as will be explained in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On cauterization of the teeth and softening of the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums have been softened by humidity and the teeth are dirty, then using those medicines and not conferring, place the tip of the cautery in its proper position, and immediately ignite it so that you place the tube over the tooth and quickly introduce the ignited cautery into it; keep it there for just a little while until the pain from the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then remove your hand, and immediately repeat the cauterization several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then have the patient rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for one hour, after which he can spit it out, because the dirty tooth is cleaned and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupted humidity is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On cauterization of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to coldness, or there is decay or worm damage, and if you do not confer on the cure with medicine, then cauterization in such cases can be done in two ways: either by using a cow's horn or by using fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterization with horn is when you take a cow's horn and boil it in vinegar, then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of the horn. Immediately immerse the boiled horn in hot oil, and quickly place it on the painful tooth until it is cooled by contact.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	From there, apply some burnings until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you do, soak linen or cloth in the aforementioned broth, and place that on the aching tooth, and place hot iron over it until the heat of the iron reaches the pain around the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, when using cautery with fire, you should attend to the thickness of the iron or metal, and it should be in the middle of some thickness so that the intensity of the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then apply the cautery with fire in the form that will come, and place it on the tooth and move it around until the cautery is rubbed; do this several times until the pain subsides either on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary that the patient gargle with good broth due to the application of the cautery and hold it in their mouth for one hour, then spit it out; this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize as much as you wish according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On Cauterization of Hemorrhoids.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hemorrhoids are full of phlegm and humors and do not respond to digestion through medicine and you wish to digest them lightly, then apply the cautery in the form described below, having two open ends so that the smoke can escape; hold the cautery by one end and place it on the swelling once or twice, heated until it reaches the base of the swelling.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then pause the cauterization according to the quantity of the abscess, and afterward let it rest for three days and place on it a poultice soaked in water until what the fire has burnt is softened.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And afterward, care for that which was touched and bandage it with cloths until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the cannula or cautery for this purpose is convenient.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On Cauterization of Throat Inflammation and Constriction of the Windpipe
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the venous humidity affects the windpipe, especially when this is due to cold temperament, then it is advisable that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and afterward cauterize there where the vein runs below.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to reach the vein with the cautery, nor burn more than a little of the skin.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize there with another cautery at the junction of the neck on the last vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And let the cautery be needle-shaped according to the previous method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And afterward care for that which was treated until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On Cauterization for Lung Disease and Coughing
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease due to cold humidity occur without fever or consumption and are chronic, then cauterize there with two cauteries on the clavicle below the junction of the collarbone and breastbone; and with another cautery in the middle part of the chest between the two nipples; and let the cauteries be needle-shaped according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your cautery be of the type called puncta, the form of which precedes in the piercing for ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let there be punctures between the bones for those; and immediately treat that with what has been prepared so that it may be healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And let the cautery have three edges, for the cautery is for that: on one occasion you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cautery of the tendon that is at the tip of the finger.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the tip of the finger is dislocated due to slippery humidity and does not return to its place because of its displacement before it reaches the liquid it usually returns to, and then with slight movement it becomes displaced again as we have testified. At such times, you should first reduce the dislocation, and then lay the patient on their back or side; and then raise the limb at the part inside the tendon towards the upper parts of your left hand if the joint is dislocated towards the inner side.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery with two ends; and this is the form of it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the limb so that it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cautery will come out with four points when you perform the cauterizations.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And do this carefully according to the amount needed; and this is the form of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And in some cases it is appropriate according to this method and because there are eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then pause over the cautery placed far from the salt, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and let the limb not be moved for some time until it is healed.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is to the upper parts and it is done as described, then cauterize over the muscle with a sharp cautery or with pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed, the moisture is dispersed, and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On Cauterization of the Stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is blood in the stomach, scrape and stir the moisture until that substance is expelled from its composition and multiplied throughout. And if you continue with the methods of treatment without hindrance, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back, extend their limbs and belongings, and then cauterize at three points: one cautery below the feet by the width of a finger using a sharp cautery, and two cauteries below the sides of the first cautery so that the figure of the cauterization forms a triangle; and keep the distance between them such that they do not cause rotting.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the bone.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the figure of the cautery be in this form without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery at the middle part of the stomach in this form; and this shall be a cautery in the shape of a circle as follows:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let it be cauterized the stomach puncturing for him who is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you sense on the stomach points according to the quantity that you wish to try, and then cauterize that which was marked with cautery at the points; and then treat that which was treated as mentioned until he is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the Cauterization of an Inflamed Kidney.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain arises in the kidney due to coldness or humidity or excessive gas that expels the normal urine through excessive evacuation, and it is cured with what we have mentioned without causing harm, then the patient should be positioned on their back, and you should mark three cauterizations according to this form and this quantity placed over the kidney below the hypochondriac regions, as one would when a person is lying down.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cauterization be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the length of each cauterization be according to the length of the right arm.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press too hard with the cautery tool.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of what adheres is half the thickness of the thumb, and it should not be tighter than that; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, with his belongings spread out, and raise his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is within your capability to perform these cauteries with a cautery knife when you possess subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to proceed too far in the cauterization, and let the cautery adhere to the entire length of the tube so that it adheres throughout the body and reaches inside the pouches, because the tube here is delicate; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the puncturing of an abscess of the kidney with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When you find an inflammation or abscess in the kidney and wish to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the kidney or in its capsule, if it is in the flesh of the kidney, the patient will experience heavy pain and acute discomfort.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the capsule of the kidney, the pain will be intense and often weary the physicians with its treatment.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, have the patient lie on their back; and then feel the location of the abscess by touching it; and subsequently ignite the cautery which resembles a reed, the form of which was described in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that cautery until the entire tube is consumed, until it reaches the pouch, until it causes healing.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area as you would for other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not advisable to use this method of cautery except by one whose study in the art of medicine is extensive and who has knowledge of many diseases; but even then, after experimenting a few times with such an operation, it is better to leave it to more experienced hands, which is safer.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On Cauterization of Ulcers.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Thus say the ancients about cauterizing the roots of nerves in ulcers, and it should be done as follows: Take a piece of the root of a lily stem that is dry and long, and let it be as thick as your finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse it in oil and roast it over the fire. Then cauterize at one point where the clavicle meets the neck; and two small points below that, slightly inclined towards the part beneath the beard; and two points inclining between the fifth rib and the spine, slightly inclined to the rear; and another at the midpoint of the legs; and one above the stomach; and three points from behind; and one at the point where it is between the two shoulders; and two points on either side of the legs below the cauterization point between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And it is not necessary to purchase your own cautery tool, but rather use what is available at the site of treatment.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And some ancient scholars have said that for some men who use a cautery made of iron resembling a needle and ignite it, they place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess to drain the pus, as we have mentioned in the case of kidney abscesses.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this puncturing with the cautery there is no fear, for if it happens that someone dies immediately or an accident occurs at the place where a fistula forms, there is no cure.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the Cauterization of Boils.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the disease of boils as we have said in regard to treatment in the division and do not conform your treatment to this, then at that time cauterize according to three methods, all of which are appropriate. One of these methods is that you perform three or four lines of cauterization according to the length of the boil, following the shape of the cauteries used for the navel, the figure of which has been described previously.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And let there be a space between each cautery of the width of one finger or a little more, and the method of the cautery should be the same method that we have described for the cauterization of the navel equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not compress the area with your hand after the cauteries; let the wound be left open on both sides.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another method of cauterizing, which is to ignite the cauteries using two vertical lines, a cause we have mentioned in the chapter on the dislocation of muscles, and elevate the shoulder, which is on the right side of the boil where the weight of the wound falls on the left side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be such that when you raise the shoulder according to the length of the body, the cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two vertical lines, ignite them immediately, in that area where they penetrate the opposite shoulder.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cauteries; thus four cauteries are completed.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you want to cauterize, have three burnings prepared.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And if the wound from which you want to cauterize has been bandaged for too many days, because it may be more convenient than other previous causes in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On Cauterization of Hydrophobics.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterization is not applied to hydrophobics except in a certain proper manner.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the hydrophobic with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not conform to your treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize him with four cauteries around the navel and one caustic on the stomach, and another caustic on the kidney, and another caustic on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one caustic at the right foot, and another caustic on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the caustic should be proportional to the sharpness of the condition.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then bandage the caustic well so that it remains covered for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not remove the harmful substances from the treatment near the caustic with water that is needed to ensure they are absorbed into the body, and it should be done quickly with the aid of healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the caustic with which the abdomen is cauterized should be nail-shaped as described above, and the one with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to its form as previously stated.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter xxxii.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On cauterization of the penis and other matters.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the penis becomes swollen with pus and is filled with watery pus, it is necessary to cauterize the penis above the joint that lies between the ring finger and the middle finger, and raise your hand holding the cautery without twisting it; then raise your hand, but do not return it entirely, as the watery pus will drain.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery should be performed in this manner: Then apply two cauterizations to each of the two areas, and on each area let a cautery be applied at the tip of the cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be according to the length of the area: place one below the beginning and the other at the middle part of the area; and on each area two cauterizations.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound uncovered for some time so that some water can drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then treat according to the causes we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter xxxiii.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On cauterization of the belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When a belly disorder is due to friction and humidity which debilitate the organs, particularly the digestive and retentive functions located in the stomach and intestines, it should be treated according to the methods of treatment without delay. If the patient can tolerate it, cauterize to expel the harmful properties with a large cautery over their stomach as previously described for stomach cauterization, using the circular method and four subtle cauterizations around the navel in a circle, with a fine nail-shaped cautery; or use one large cautery over the pubis, or two.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you remove the overflowing humors and the pain is tolerable with water, then cauterize that above the navel and on the veins, and lightly apply two cauteries on the stomach and near the groin, for this is a perfect cure from which you will not deviate.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter xxxiv.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the Cauterization of Ancient Hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When it is in the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or one of thick humors rubbing or of corrupted humidity, and they are cured with water as we have said in the division and do not conform to the usual cure, then cauterize with three cauteries above the pus near the lower spine, making them small and triangular, and two more above the navel placed parallel to these.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that the stomach of the patient is irritated and the food not digested, and their face becomes inflamed, then cauterize above the stomach with a large cauterization as previously mentioned; and one on the liver, and another on the spleen using a pointed cautery, and leave the cauteries for some time to take effect, and subsequently treat so that they may be healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter xxxv.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the Cauterization of Hysteria Near Its Removal.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove the uterus, then use cauteries that resemble rays.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Near the incision, introduce the cautery into the removed uterus, and ensure that it ultimately reaches the place where the vein from which the blood flows is located.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	In one or two days, because if the pain is too great, then cauterize each of them as we have recounted, and afterward cure those with something from among the ointments until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery over the wound, it is better for healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On Cauterization of Fistulas That Are Made in the Rear Parts of the Body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When the body does not respond to the treatment we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, let it be healed with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when someone has a fistula in the rear parts of the body, and it is old, with corrupt pus and moisture, then what is most worthy to do is to probe that area carefully with something subtle, and afterward determine the depth of it using the previously mentioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then apply the cautery which resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then place the heated cautery into this fistula according to the amount that the probe has entered.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat with the cautery until those corrupted substances are burned away completely in one instance or two or three, according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful not to burn the nerve and vein; or if the fistula goes into the body of the bladder or the intestine, then be cautious about all those areas; and do this only when the fistula is in a fleshy location where you think it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, take care of the place inside so that it may be healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and all matter has been removed from it, and it remains thus for a long time, then you will know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matter does not come from the bones, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the region of a corrupted bone, or falls from those causes of which there will be mention later.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the Cauterization of Wounds.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When pain in the wounds is caused by friction or excessive swelling, and thus the patient's condition is worsened, then it is necessary to cauterize them with a cautery on each wound using an appropriate cautery as will be mentioned.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And after a short while, we should cauterize it again, so that there will be three cauterizations lined up, and thus they will be more beneficial subsequently.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the Cauterization of the Bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When debility and softness occur in the bladder due to friction and excessive humidity such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize it just above the bladder where the hair of the pubis begins, using one cautery on the right side and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the sweat; and cauterize it with one cautery in the lower part of both sides, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let the cautery be made according to its preparation.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter xxxix.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On Cauterization of the Eye.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is blood and moisture in the eye, and because of this, treatment is prohibited, and their menstruation becomes corrupted, and it delays its provocation, and pain occurs due to its presence. Therefore, the area should be cauterized three times around the navel, as we have said regarding the cauterization of the bladder; or two cauteries above the affected area, a short distance apart, or one cautery, and this cautery should be made according to its preparation.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter xli.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On Cauterization of Dislocation of the Joint.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When there is moisture and swelling in the vicinity of the joint, and it occurs due to causes related to the displacement of its location, and the sign of this is that one part extends beyond the other when compared.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is treated where it occurs.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then you should cauterize the affected area near the joint with two circular cauteries after you have marked their placement around the affected part as it is rotated, so that the part falls in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let the form of this cautery be as it is prescribed in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries using a large olive-shaped cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be performed according to the quantity of the inflammation of the entire wound; and then take care of that which needs healing.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLI.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the groin area and its cause is friction and humidity, treat it with what we have mentioned and do not confine it, as this is outdated. Now, you should release the patient from thick humors using fetid pills or artificial pills or similar treatments; then cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either cauterization with combustible medicines, or cauterization with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It should be done according to two known methods. One of which is that you cauterize that area over the groin with three triangular cauteries as follows; and make them sufficiently deep.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cauterization should be the width of the thickness of a finger, and the cauterizations should be olive or large in size.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	But in some cases, the cauterizations should be on top of the middle part over the head of the groin, so there are four cauterizations.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize with a circle whose shape precedes the cautery used in the dislocation of the groin, such that it encompasses and burns the inflammation of the entire wound.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cauterization when pain is adherent to the groin and does not spread within the body.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	If it is spread inside the joint, then at that time cauterize with two cauteries on the joint above where you will send the pain which is the pain; and one cauterization on the nodule for four days a little away from the wild area.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery cuts, and its depth depends on the amount of stiffness of the joint.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the pain you send is spread in the area near the feet, then at that time cauterize there where you will send it with three points or four or more if you need of that.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the pain you send is below the shoulder near the joint, then at that time cauterize there with one cutting cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cauterizations that you do not end the cautery until you burn a nerve or large artery, and thereby cause harm to the patient badly or lead to contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen one and another of those who cauterized on the nodule and ended the cauterization, and the bed sore spread inside until the swelling reached the foot, and the sore penetrated and corrupted the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And as a result of a severe abdominal inflammation, and as a result of that death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise ones say about the cauterization of either cautery of which this is the method: make it resemble a circle of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and place it above the opening according to the thickness of a date bone or slightly less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And in that circle make another third one; and let the space which is between them be equal to the thickness of a finger; and let those circles be divided into two parts; and let the length of those cords be one finger or two fingers, and fix them decently prepared iron margins in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then set it on fire in the flame so that it reddens and throws sparks, and then place it over the part of the vessel, with the malatua placed on its back.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And thus cauterize that wound with three cauteries in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then let him rest for three days; then apply a bandage to the wound and let the inflammation subside over several more days; and then treat the wound with medicines until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Al-Bucasis says: Oh sons, we have rarely used this type of cautery out of fear of its consequences, and because few have found those who are knowledgeable about it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But for the best cauteries, use them on him who endures them, and find the place where they are most effective.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But the best cauteries with adhering medicines are those you make two circles having a perforated armula in which the mouth of iron should fit; let the length of the bars in their natural state be two walnuts or more like that.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between each one be equal to the thickness of a finger; and let them be divided below and above, and let them contain each other according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Here is the translation:
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then raise your hand holding the instruments and wipe away the hard water from all over with soft water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Then let him be bathed for three days and placed on that board until the darkness of the bruising subsides, and let this continue for several days until the inflammation has subsided; this is best for improvement.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then care for him with herbs until he is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends to the chest or the groin, apply the poultice in the manner that contains water as described for the water treatment.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hard water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the preparation of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and for acid, each from separate parts mixed in equal amounts, and strain them and place in a new jar of which the bottom part is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into the remedy.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place at the bottom of the jar another inverted jar, and pour over that alkali and live acid with soft water in which it rises by one finger, and when you compress them with your hand for good compression, let the jar descend from the sharp water into the lower part of the inverted jar.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then adjust all that water and pour it over another live acid and fresh alkali, because at this point it will have great strength, which is administered in many medical procedures and for cauterizing other limbs, as a fire operation does.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And so of certain medicines with which cautery is used widely, such as honey and vinegar mixed with soda and salt, so that they are blended.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounts of a man from the ancients the operation and the cure with which he was cured of pain in the sciatic vein and nerve, and magnifies it as being good to be done, and says that there is no need for any other cure, because he was healed once as recommended, because quickly he entered into a bath and then got up from it.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be applied from a certain green herb, and if the green herb is not available, a fresh fig should be used; and it should be crushed with a little vinegar and placed on the limb where there is pain, or in the thigh, or in the hip, and it should be bandaged.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left on for three hours or for the duration that the patient considers comfortable after adjusting.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then place him in a bath, and when his body is relaxed, move him to the ground, for the pain will cease and he will be healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cautery with these medicines except after the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But Hippocrates said that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with kid's horn, it benefits the patient greatly; and the cautery should be applied in this way: wool should be soaked in old oil and placed between the toes and the heel.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take a dry kid's horn and ignite it over fire until it turns to charcoal; and then place it on the wool and let it lie there until it is spread out.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	After this, pour water continuously so that the feeling of the bite reaches the water and thus alleviates the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called cow cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On Cautery for Two-Knee Pain
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	In some cases, pain in both knees is caused by excessive reasons, such as from squatting or impact or from excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to these, through the infusion of moist and irritating matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery should not be used except in this single case, which is done through the application of irritating matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, after evacuating the harmful matter, place small pills and similar items on the knees where the pain is, three lines away according to the width of the knee. Then apply five cauteries or more in each line, depending on the tolerance of the patient and the strength of the treatment.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And the cautery should be performed using point cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three or four point cauteries in the middle of the knee according to this method:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On Cautery for the Beginning of Goutiness.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Sometimes this illness affects small children as well; and the sign of its beginning in children is that it occurs on their limbs, causing elevation and difficulty in movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you will find the difficulties in the last vertebra of the back and in those that begin to rise above the others.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize that spot with a circular cauterization as follows:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	so that it takes the cautery over all parts of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close together.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then take care of the area within it to ensure it heals as we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But be careful not to administer the cautery on inflammation caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pains are caused by the movement of humors that flow into each limb, and when pain occurs in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this gout properly.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore, when gout caused by the movement of humors is treated with the method of treatment and not alleviated by it, then the cauterization should be applied.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And when you cauterize that area for evacuation around the joint of the foot with pointed cautery.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let it be an olive-shaped cautery, which has this shape:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary that a puncture be made on the face of the foot, then hot cautery should be used for the puncture.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains ascend into the joints or other junctions, and this often happens, then cauterize that area around each joint with three or four cauteries of olive charcoal.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you must use these cauteries that are necessary for you, then cauterize that area and do not press too hard with your hand before the cauterization, but only around the specificity of the joint.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains ascend into the joint and the bone, then administer the cauteries which we have mentioned in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the muscles and it is called sugar, then puncture around the edges as it revolves, puncture in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the said area, then puncture around the edges over each node and on the base of the finger.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains ascend close to the sides of the ribs or the muscles, then cauterize them from all sides with the assistant's help.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And if you do not evacuate the malady through good regimen and reception of medicines, for if good regimen is followed and phlegm is evacuated with this cautery, it will heal, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On Cauterization of Fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When you find a rupture in the groin and the intestines protruding before the skin, and this begins to happen near by, then it is necessary for you to order the sick person to leave off eating on that day and use laxatives so that the protrusion may come forth from his belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And let the sick person lie close to you on his back, and command him to hold his breath until it is thrust out or the skin or intestines appear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then tell him to lie on his side, and feel for the rupture over the bone of the pubis, marking the extremity of which is like half a circle in the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then prepare the cautery, which has this shape:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it is red-hot and gives off sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then reduce the intestines or skin to their normal position, and then press your hand on the place so that the intestine does not slip back.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And you have now placed something between the patient’s thighs and leave him lying on one side, with another person supporting his shoulders and another his feet, while he lies on his side.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery on that mark with your hand on top of the cautery, and keep it there until you feel the bone of the pubis beneath the middle finger; and repeat this another time if you did not succeed in doing so during the first attempt.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe carefully the condition of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn it, for if you do, it may bring death or other great harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you use cautery, do not hold it with your teeth, do not conduct your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And let the cautery for children be gentle according to their age and size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And take care of the place where you use the cautery for three days until the burn scar heals.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the place is sealed and the plague subsides.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is necessary to suspend the patient's nutrition according to the length of time required for the cure, during which the intestines should not be damaged by excessive force in treating them.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when you want to start removing it after forty days, administer it gradually and properly, and continue for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let them be reduced in work and in the intake of food and drink, and in loud speaking, for when they follow this regimen of complete recovery, they will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will describe the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if you do not want them to spread, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size; let this be removed as much as one-third of it from the cord; and subsequently treat it as we have said, and it will heal.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some earlier practitioners said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this form, as it is marked with a template:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	This is a paused line that you follow through the latitude in the flesh above the rupture, and another line above it; then pause your hand with a cautery nail, but the first cautery is farther and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On Cauterization of Dislocations.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When you find in any members by falling or by striking pain that persists and the pain continues for a long time and does not improve with medicine, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And let the cautery for each member be according to its size and smallness, and its strength and delicacy, and the location of the dislocation and the pain in it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If it heals with the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on it. For it is customary for such pains to be punctured in a member close to where the pain is, so you need to achieve this with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On Cauterization of Leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some cases of leprosy are helped greatly by cautery, but rarely in the case of the type of leprosy that is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so when you want to cauterize that patient, consider whether the leprosy is widespread and has not been cured by what we have mentioned in the division and do not delay, and be afraid that the corruption will encompass the whole body of the patient and all its composition, then cauterize it on the head with v cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second further down, near the forehead at the end of the hair; and two on the temples; and one behind, on the nape or back of the neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And lastly your hand should apply the cautery a little inside where it presses on the bone, and from there the scars are displaced, so that the expulsion of thick vapors may be facilitated from there; and cauterize over the wound as is necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy has already spread over the body and is clearly manifest, then you should cauterize in those places with those cauteries which we have mentioned at the beginning; and one cautery on the tip of the nose, two cauteries on each cheek, two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, one large cautery on the vertebrae near the buttocks, one cautery on the buttocks, two cauteries on each thigh, one cautery on each ankle, two cauteries on each elbow and one on each wrist, two cauteries on each knee joint, two on each muscle, and two on each tendon of their feet; and cauterize that over all the joints of the fingers and toes, and on each heel of their feet, and on the hollows of their hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves which lie over the heel so that you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And in some cases it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the little toe and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as others would, because his body is already numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is appropriate that the cauteries be large or few according to the members and joints as dictated by the properties of the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Regarding the care of cautery, use flour of barley mixed with honey. For the other treatment, let it be for healing.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On cauterization for stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a limb is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb limb with cautery according to the magnitude of the limb or the size of it.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let the heat of the cautery enter slightly beneath the surface of the skin.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And subsequently treat that area with an ointment so that it may heal.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes a cautery is applied to a numb area that extends to the ribs and spine, as well as to the points where the nerves that control that limb are located, and thus the numbness is alleviated.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not proceed with this unless one is wise in the anatomy of limbs and the distribution of nerves throughout the moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On cauterization of ulcers that are infected.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When an old ulcer does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you should cauterize it with cautery slightly according to the quantity and specificity of the skin so that the whiteness and color of it change, and its color be altered.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And subsequently treat that area with flour of barley and lentils mixed with rose oil and leaves of arnica, and either dove blood or swallow blood, using an equal part of each and mixing them all together, then apply a bandage over it so that it may heal.
Capitol .l.	Chapter I.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On cauterizing wounds.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize that part with a cauterizing instrument in the shape of a circle around it as it appears.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in its proper place; but I have not seen this done, for I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have seen this happen several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is safer to cauterize around the wound in a circular manner as we have said, or with words like these.
Capitol .li.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On cauterizing of burns.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When a burn is delayed in healing due to the excess of matter it contains, or because of the patient's condition, being old and weak, with little blood, or because of the time; then cauterize around the wound with small punctures using a cautery instrument; and afterward apply something that will hasten its healing.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to make a perforation with the cautery, then use a cautery of this shape; and place it in the proper location of the burn until it penetrates the tissue.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is applied in a place that is further away, so that the arm is not burdened; and then care for it until it heals.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On cautery with corrosives.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosives are like a wandering corruption in the limb, which consumes it as fire devours dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, when you see the corrosive in a place that can tolerate cautery with fire, then you ignite and apply small cauterizations, and larger ones as is appropriate in the location where the corrosion is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And proceed to cauterize it from all sides until you eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause for its recurrence.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then dress it for three days, and apply ointment three times a day on the cauterized areas until all the scars are healed and all corruption is eradicated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat it with substances that promote flesh growth.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days you see that healthy flesh is growing where there is no more corruption, that is good. But if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains in the corrupted areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And some corrosives are treated with sharp medicines, for these serve as an alternative to cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But cautery with fire is more effective quickly.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already mentioned the treatment with sharp medicines in the division above, and so use that when you find it necessary.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On cautery of nails and other similar cases.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	In many cases, when dealing with the divisions or parts of the foot that are diseased and are called clavus, which is a thick, ingrown condition affecting the foot; and cautery for this can be done in two ways, namely fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Fire cautery is when you ignite the cautery in the shape of a crescent, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the clavus from all parts, and it should be fine-edged.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place the ignited cautery on the clavus, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the clavus until the cautery reaches the depth of the clavus.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave that for three days until it begins to form scabs.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a plaster made of crushed wild mallows with salt to it, and leave the plaster on it for one night, because that will eradicate it from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a healing flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and many times this happens on the surface of the body, mainly in the hands and feet, then you should administer hot water cautery to them. This is done by taking a small tube made of iron or brass or crescent-shaped, and place it on the clavus; then pour a small amount of hot water into the tube, and hold your hand, rotating it with the pressure of your hand completely, so that the edge of the tube touches the root of the clavus; and the hot water will flow towards the root of the clavus. Wait for the disease to react slightly to the heat of the water for an hour, and then remove it, as the clavus with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus place one finger next to another until you cover all of them with your hand.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And carefully treat those pus spots until the roots of the nails have been eradicated with the help of these ointments, with which the flesh grows back.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the cautery for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you find a tremor due to irritation of the nerves or from fever causing irritation, or from some similar cause, it is necessary that you cauterize it with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cauterization; and at the ankles, and above the stomach, use an olive-shaped cauterization.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of the patient subsides and hastens the recovery from the illness.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LIV.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cautery for accidental injuries to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When the body is suddenly injured and pus-filled wounds appear, which are formed from thick, corrupted matter; therefore, at the beginning when they appear, it should be cauterized over the entire head of the fistula with a fine cautery made of myrtle wood, the end of which is extended to the fire; or with long eagle talons; or with a lens-shaped cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes it is appropriate to cauterize at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and if it is not done, then the excess matter that causes these issues is disrupted, and thus they heal from them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it is necessary that this be done appropriately for evacuation and phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LX.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On cauterization of blood flow due to accidental cutting of an artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	If the flow of blood from an artery that has been cut is prolonged due to the condition that caused it in the first place, or due to the beginning of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and similar situations, then it is difficult to remedy this.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	When such an accident occurs, immediately place your finger over the opening of the artery, and press on it with enough strength to stop the flow of blood until you can secure this position so that no more blood escapes.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place the olive wood cauteries, both small and large, in the fire for a number of moments, and blow on them until they are ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one of those cauteries, either small or large depending on the location and condition in which the artery is ruptured, and apply it quickly after you have removed your finger, so that the blood flow is sealed and restrained.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove your finger and apply the cautery, then take another cautery quickly from those that are prepared in the fire, and continue to do this one after another until the blood flow is stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerve that is here, and ensure that it does not cause other harm.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible then to restrain the blood, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: either by cauterization as we have said, or by extraction, for when it is extracted, the extremities are burned and the blood is restrained, or it may be bound with a ligature or bandage made of strong material, or it may be placed upon medicines whose virtue is to restrain the blood; and they may be strengthened with a pillow and moderate constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	And let him who administers moderate constriction with bandages and by means of cloths or through the positioning of burning substances and similar methods not hurry but proceed slowly.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	And if anyone is to act and there is no physician present or medicine available, then gently press the tip of the finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction inside so that the blood stops from flowing from the upper part of the wound, and on the artery do not rub; and over the artery sprinkle with very cold water until the blood is congealed and thickened; and then decide whether cauterization or medicine is necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation and ventouses and of phlebotomy and of wounds and their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already stated in the first chapter all diseases in which cautery with fire is appropriate and burning medicines, along with their occasions and causes, and the instruments necessary for the forms of cauterizations; and I have organized the chapters on the superiority of the head among other parts.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	In this procedure in this chapter by that method, so that the patient may be praised for it, at the time concerning what they have asked.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, take note, son, that in this chapter it is by means of fear what is in the first chapter on cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for this reason, it is necessary to be in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many cases of evacuation occur, whether it involves blood or pus that sustains life, due to the application on the vein or incision over the abscess or opening an exit or purging a plague or extracting a splinter or starting a lithotomy or similar procedures.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And in all of those cases, accompany fear and trembling, and in the most severe of them, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that upon you does not fall what is in the case of hesitation, for some cases depend on your methods regarding people with various diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And among them are some who become angry about their illness and die quickly because of the intensity of what they find regarding their illness, and due to the length of the illness, and this anger signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among them is one who gives away their possessions and says, "I hope for health from this," while their actual illness is fatal.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore, you should not consent to those who come to you with this manner; and your caution should be greater than your greed and rapacity; and do not assume any cause without proper certain knowledge that verifies what concerns you, and for which a commendable tradition exists.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	For the treatment of all your patients, prognosis and indication of what is beneficial to their health are necessary, for in that lies help for you in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, children, may God inspire your mind and not take from you direction and protection, for this is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter to be distinguished by chapters as it follows the chapter on cauteries, concerning the treatment of the head among other parts, so that you may find what you seek and need from this.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often afflicts children shortly after birth when the nurse presses too hard on the child’s head.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And at times it happens for hidden causes that are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have seen this illness only in children; and to all those whom I saw it brought death, and thus it seemed to me to be a fatal condition.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the swelling of his head was so great that he could not move due to the size of his head, and before long the humidity increased until it caused death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity is either aggregated between the brain and the bone, or it is aggregated below the bone on the brain.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For when the operation is to be performed and the moisture lies between the bone and the abscess and the abscess is small, at that time you should cut in the middle of the head an incision in length, and let the length of the incision extend by two fingers’ breadth where the moisture runs, and this is the form of the spatum:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then there are here two incisions according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is below the bone, the sign of this is that you see the sutures of the head covered on all sides and the water is squeezed when you press it with your hand at the surface but not inside, and it is not hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	You should cut in the middle of the head with three incisions according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	and immediately the incision extracts all the moisture; and then dress the incisions with cloths and bandages; and then pour over it vinegar and oil from the fifth day, and then loosen the binding and treat the wound with lint and unguents, and bind the head with equality; and eat the food that is dry with little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which you should consider based on the size of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occipital region, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the abscess appears and the accumulation of water, and do this according to what is best for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and stop the flow of blood, or the patient will suffer harm from that flow of blood and evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On the cutting of arteries that are near the ears, called helisseysse.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Second.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When I deal with certain abscesses or wounds on the hands or feet, and if it is old and not treated with medication, then the last resort treatment involves these two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore, when you want to cut those that the patient raises their hand, first rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries become visible; then bind the patient's neck with a cloth; and then observe where the pulse is felt; the locations of each are near the ears, though they may be hidden in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then press on the artery with your thumb, and then cut each one with a sharp scalpel, cutting deeply enough to reach the bone, and do this along the length of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the scalpel below the artery and cut it where it meets the upper parts.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, because when an artery is cut, the blood flows out in a pulsating manner, frequently gushing forth.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear clearly, then measure from the ear a distance of three fingers, and then press with your thumb to find it, and make an incision down to the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	In what must be poured out of the blood is the quantity of one ounce, and it is light in weight when poured from barley or wheat, and all this is according to the amount which appears of the strength of the patient and the fullness of the vein.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the inflammation, and if any cause of pus remains on the bone, now incise that so as not to become an abscess by cauterization.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the inflammation with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and afterwards treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of veins which are on the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When it happens that someone suffers from chronic or acute headache due to excessive moisture in the body and its quality in the veins of the temples, or if it is similar to these conditions, and treatment with medicinal methods does not provide relief, then we resort to bloodletting from the veins on the temples, or cauterization as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction of those veins is that the patient shaves the hair which is on the temples; and understand the visible vein in the temple as it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is concealed only in a few people due to the intensity of friction.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is concealed from you, then tie the patient's head with some cloth; and afterwards rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the vein becomes clearly visible.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the spatum, which has this form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you peel the membrane in such a way that you reach the artery; and then cut it where necessary to extract it from the parts until you remove it from the membrane and uncover the tunics beneath, which you leave intact from all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is delicate, then wrap it at its extremity with a ligature, and then cut away a part according to the amount by which the ends of it need to be lengthened or shortened, and there will be no bleeding, for if they are not cut back in this way, the blood will not flow properly.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then remove about half an ounce to three ounces of blood.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then place it in two places with a double-thick thread of flax or long cords, and do not allow it to become putrid before the healing of the wound, so that there is no bleeding.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut away the excess that is between two ligatures; and do this either at that hour or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone or use a knife-shaped cautery until the ends of it are severed, and this will serve as a substitute for that procedure.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to perform this work when the patient does not have a fever or has a heated constitution; for cautery is among those causes that help eliminate final humidity, and thus it is better to do so while the condition is favorable.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	Regarding the extraction of arteries, ensure that the place is clean beforehand, and lay the patient on a prepared surface decently, and nearby have dry medicines ready to promote flesh growth and warm applications to aid in healing.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if during the procedure blood begins to flow from the artery, then you should work to restrict that blood, either by cauterization or by filling the area with cotton and pressing firmly so as to constrict the blood.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those methods are available to you, then press your hand on the area until the blood is constricted, and apply the site with water of extreme coldness until the pain subsides, and continue applying pressure as needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And the most important thing in extracting an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery using two irons, after marking both places with ink, and then place some material on fire so that it reaches the bone and cuts the vein at two points, so that what is between these ends can be extended, since it has not been fully consolidated by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two irons should be exemplary.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if you use slightly less sharp irons than two, it is better, for if they are as sharp as two irons, they may approach too close to each other and cut the flesh too quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is some thickness in the area, maintain the heat of the fire and cut through the flesh gradually.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better than any other work and more concise.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the spaces between two ribs be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	About the treatment of acute and acidic tears of the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are acidic tears, and the condition affects the veins that appear on top of the head, and if you do not find any cause for treatment with medicine in this case, often the face of the patient turns red, and a sensation as if ants were moving can be felt in their forehead, and the eyes due to this become extremely weakened, so much that even the hair around them is noticeable, and the eyelids are scorched by the sharpness of the tears. The ancient masters were very careful in the treatment of such conditions, and they did not consider this treatment a simple matter.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to pluck out the hairs that are on their forehead, and then make three incisions evenly spaced according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one incision should be evenly spaced along the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length slightly towards the movement of the tears that flow from the tear duct, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful not to cut into the arteries that are on both sides, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between each incision is the quantity of three fingers apart.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of prepared sponge or dry cloth with which you squeeze out the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatum between two sharp points, which has this form for the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the part of the flaps into the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise all the tissue that is between two incisions on the crest which is above the bone, and then make this median incision into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then stretch this spatum and insert into the first incision another tool called a knife, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And pause the sharp side on the flesh adjacent to the tissue, and the blunt side within the bone, and move it until you reach the median fissure, and divide all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	But ensure that the incision continues to appear on the tissue, and then make this in the median fissure into the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the blood flow is equal in quantity, press the places from which the clotted blood has been collected.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place dry, aged wood shavings in each fissure, and sprinkle them with powder mixed in vinegar and oil and sweet wine, to prevent an abscess from forming.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, loosen the bandage and administer a large infusion of hot water or decoction, and then treat with ointment made of basilicon in rose oil and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 4.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of phlegm through catharsis and the expulsion of fluids from the inner parts of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is a sudden and continuous urge for catharsis in someone, and the fluids from the patient are expelled in small quantities due to their weakness, and if the condition of their eyelids is ulcerated with hair loss, and there is acute pain and severe tension in the forehead, then you should understand from these symptoms that the matter and catharsis do not come except from the small veins of the inner parts.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for this is as follows: command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in the middle of the forehead, a small one in width (beginning from the fissure on the left temple towards the right temple; and the incision should go through the bone; extend your hand between the temples where chewing takes place), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then apply between the two edges of the incision a piece of old linen or cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply powder mixed with vinegar and oil so that it does not lead to an infected abscess.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you release this and see that the abscess has already diminished, then cover it by scraping the bone until new flesh begins to form, and afterwards treat it with a drying regimen such as making plaster from two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colocynth mixed together, which should be applied to these wounds where new flesh is growing.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the treatment of what affects the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Any cause that affects the ears is one of four types: either it is a mineral stone or something resembling a stone such as iron or wood, or it is from a plant such as chaff or beans, or it is a fluid substance like water and vinegar or similar liquids, or some kind of animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when a stone affects the ear or any other cause similar to those mentioned that does not adhere but rather lodges in the ear, then expose the ear to the sun, and if you see the stone, at that time drop into it some substance of violet oil or cumin, and subsequently administer its extraction with conditions, and make the patient sneeze by inducing a sneezing fit, and plug the nose upon the occurrence of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place around the opening of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the upper parts, as it often helps with these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not expelled, then administer its extraction with the instrument called a gentil epistilus, which has the following form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is expelled with the instrument, that is good; and if not, then administer its extraction with a thin piece of wood through slight manipulation.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not expelled by these methods, then make a tube of reed and insert one end of the tube into the ear canal, and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that nothing else enters except through the tube.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	From this excerpt taken from the text on veins with strong attraction, for troops accustomed as we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If it is not forgotten in this manner, now take a thin piece of wood or a small apparatus with which birds are usually caught, a small amount, and place that at the end of the vein, and then wrap that area carefully placed.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert it into the opening of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of its humidity.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And thus if it is not forgotten with all the causes that we have recounted, now you should proceed to incise that area which has become inflamed or spasmodic.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of incising that area is to begin by puncturing the diseased vein and extracting the blood according to the method appropriate for it, and then make a small cut between your fingers and turn the ear towards you, and make a small fissure at the edge of the ear where it is most prominent.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the incision be in a crescent shape until it reaches the stone, and when the stone is located, remove it if possible with appropriate instruments; and then close the incision quickly at that moment, and care for it until it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause in the ear is one of the growths that have become inflamed, now administer the treatment and the extraction of it; but if you do not proceed accordingly, then take fine cotton wadding in this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer the removal of that growth which has become lodged in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	If you do not want to use water when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor from the ear, place it in small pieces, and extract them with hooks or with subtle instruments, as we have said, for the extraction must be gentle.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	In the water that has entered into the ear, it is beneficial for the patient to use sneezing with a mixture at the beginning, and fill their other ear with some old cloth, and then lay on the side where the water is. If this dislodges the water, it is good; otherwise, take smooth stones or lemons according to the length of a finger, heat them in the fire for a little while, and have the patient insert one of those into their ear canal and jump with the affected side down, striking another stone against the heated stone that is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Do not remove the stone until all the water is expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And the water will be expelled in this way: take paper or cotton, place one end of it in the ear and hold the other end over a flame until it burns away.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And place another piece of cotton in and do this as many times as necessary until all the water is expelled, and squeeze it with a cannula as was mentioned above regarding the extracting stone.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of an animal entering the ear, if it is a small object, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large object that causes pain to the patient, then administer the extraction with instruments and hooks, and the cause of this is more serious than all other causes that enter the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the tractate on distillations and do not confound your treatment, then you should expose the ear to the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if any cause of the worms appears here, then extract that am or thin am, but if no cause appears, then take a tube narrow below and wide above, which has this shape:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the slender end into the ear according to the amount that suffices for the patient; and then suck out the am with great suction, and do this several times until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if you do not obey this advice, then apply and plug along the length of the tube with wax as we have said; then administer distillations that have already been proven effective in treating worms, which you will find described in the tractate on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your application be with the oil medicine that you pour into the ear using this instrument, which has this shape:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or ivory, narrow at the bottom, in which there is a small hole, and flat on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus it should be as pressing when in the constriction of the tube where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take a reed and wrap the end of it decently with cotton, and then pour oil into the cavity of hearing, or juice from some herb, or any of these medicines into the tube — and that is in the ear —, and then insert the reed wrapped with cotton above and press it gently so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of hearing and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	Take what is enclosed in the ear and heat it a little over fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the substance you will apply in the ear is not too irritating, for medicines for the ear cannot tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of blocked ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes infants are born with their ears not perforated, and this also happens in some adults, where the ear canal is blocked by an infection or flesh growing there; and this blockage sometimes occurs at the entrance of the ear canal where it cannot be seen, and sometimes it is further inside.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And when it occurs at the entrance of the ear, where it cannot be seen, it is in the most difficult positions for easy treatment.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And when you can see it, have the patient expose the affected ear to the sun and observe it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see an obstruction that is visible, open it with a fine probe of the following shape:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it is small in width, with one side sharp and the other not; and the probe should be two-sided so as not to injure the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the blockage is due to flesh growing in the ear or in the ear canal, then use fine forceps and carefully cut away all the flesh.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the blockage is at the entrance of the ear, then take a thin needle and heat it slightly over fire, and then place it in the ear canal.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And thus if you have noticed that the swelling is on the side where the patient has more ease, due to the heaviness of hearing, it presses the swelling on that easier side; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place in the ear a piece of cloth according to the quantity of the swelling which you have wrapped in Egyptian cotton; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the swelling; or take something and push it into warm water and sprinkle it with finely ground powder and use it. And if you see that the ear is already abscessed, then you must remove what was there and replace it with another piece wrapped in wax mixed with rose oil, until the abscess has subsided; and afterward care for it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if there is bleeding, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that stops the flow of blood, which is described in the chapter on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of boils that occur on the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Boils that occur on the eyelids sometimes appear moist, and at other times they are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you should have these available either in tin or in ounce containers, and then sprinkle them finely over the affected areas, and afterward place something finely powdered on those spots.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if pain and bleeding occur, then you should cauterize those areas with a fine cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best cautery is applied to incisions and grooves that return when the cause of them remains; and when these are burned with fire, those grooves are consumed and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for a condition that affects the eyelids.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Grooves appear in the eyelids due to some cause that resembles a serious condition in its strength and hardness, and therefore it is called a serious condition.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the eyelid, both above and below.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the treatment for this is to observe whether the condition has spread on the surface of the eyelid and has affected it entirely; and the cause of this is superficial.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision along the length of it, and then carefully remove it entirely with ease until it is completely extracted, and then stop the bleeding and close it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not able to make an initial incision because pus penetrates the eyelid with small incisions, then this is not noted as any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and take care of it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not have trouble with it because the warmth of it restores and heals it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the condition is spreading to the inner parts of the eyelid, you should examine the inner surface, then lift the eyelid and stop the bleeding without making an incision, and press it entirely, and if the eyelid is stretched due to the incision, this is not noted as any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	At the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with water that promotes healing until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	About the treatment of a tumor above the eye socket.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	A tumor is gray and originates in the layers of the upper eyelid, and it often affects children, worsening their wounds and leading to a severe attack of catarrh when they die; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears continuously flow from their eyes.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And for this reason they often lie with their faces covered, and they sleep with their faces covered; and the eyelashes of their lower lids are moist, which have been covered by inflammation, and the appearance of a tumor is apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you can feel a tumor inside.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And there is a method of operation for when the patient places their head in your lap, and you place a cloth over them and make a circle according to the amount it contains of all parts, and then place that on them and press with your fingers all around so that the tumor aggregates in the middle of the circle, and then introduce moisture into it using a spatula through a fissure along its length, but the fissure should not be larger than the one made in phlebotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the initial incision, you should cut through the tissue completely until you reach the tumor, because in major procedures, you treat the tumor through a fissure according to the form of a white mass.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, extract that which is wrapped in the cloths among those you have wrapped around it from the sides and roll between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to insert it into the crack so that the powder does not reach the wound and damage it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if it does not appear to you ready at the beginning of the crack, then insert into the crack a small piece that can be easily removed; and then extract it as we have said; and then immerse cloths in warm water and vinegar, place them over the area, and secure them with powder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And some people sprinkle salt and place it in the deepest part of the crack so that what remains is free from moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an abscess occurs in the area, then treat it with soft plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On the methods of examining the wound.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When hair is inserted below the natural eyelashes and when this happens naturally or due to antiquated practices, it causes irritation to the eye and leads to various ailments such as continuous tears and swelling of the eyelids, which can result in damage to the eye known as examining or treating the wound. It is done in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or using sharp medicine as previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization; or it is performed through incision and suturing; or through tubes, as I will explain.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore place the tip of the lancet in the proper spot; then move the upper eyelid with your left hand, and if it moves well, that is good; but if not, insert a needle into one of the spots below the eyelash on the edge of the eyelid near where the hair begins, and push the needle to the base beneath the eyelash, close to where the hair grows, and pull out the pus to the upper parts with the eyelid, and turn that part towards the light.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then, in the inner part of the eyelid below the hair, close to where the lacrimal duct is located, direct it into the smaller lacrimal duct; and then extract the pus and place small pieces of wood or cloth underneath the eyelid; and afterwards press on the eyelid with a probe, as shown in the figure resembling a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, the figure should be according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, since this varies among people; for some, you must incise a considerable amount from the eyelid according to how much the eyelid is swollen.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then direct the probe along the two lines you have marked, starting from the larger lacrimal duct towards the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if the incision near the natural hairline is as thick as the king's finger.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the probe in one of the two angles of the cheekbone, and then excoriate that area entirely; and then join the two edges of the incision with fine thread or wool, and clean the blood, and make what is excessive of the pus adhere to two eyebrows using some sticky substances, if you wish to do this, and if not, it does not matter.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	About four days after sewing up the wounds, begin treatment with this.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you prefer to treat the wound without sewing, use something that dries and constricts it, because the eyelid is elevated due to the sealing of the wound and the accumulation of fluid; but sewing is better. This is what the ancients recommended for this condition.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, let there be careful attention to the condition and it should be handled with good practice, and not out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method for treating this, which involves marking on the eyelid in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and then lifting the eyelid with three small instruments arranged in this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if that is not possible, use the needles, and this is not equalized; now take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the larger lacrimal duct, and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal duct, and adjust between these threads to equalize them, and then lift your hand with an even elevation, lifting the entire marked area as we have described.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bring the two edges of the wound together with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if an abscess occurs due to your incision or your wound, treat that abscess with cerate and something similar, and at intervals.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes you may need to turn the eyelashes away from the wound; then proceed as we have said about incision; but sewing is more artificial in these cases.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To make a reed needle, follow this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And so you convert the eyelid and dissect the figure that is inside as I have recounted; and then by art make two reeds or two thin sticks, whose length should be according to the length of the eyelid and whose width should be narrow like that of the pupil.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already cut into the extremities of each section, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then apply each one with subtlety over what is superfluous of the eyelid, and bind the reeds in each section tightly, and leave it for some days, because the excess will die due to the constriction and will be rejected and will fall off on its own.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, now break it with force, and then treat the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When it has hardened, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not sting.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two reeds that you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and the quantity of the length and width should neither be more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On Removing Stinging Hairs from the Eye Using a Needle When the Hair is Embedded.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When there are unnatural, hard, rough, and stinging hairs in the eye, the operation is that you take a fine needle and place it on each hair gently and carefully, and then adjust the ends of them delicately.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the fields be one palm in quantity.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And below that, prepare another fine field briefly, and use the extremities of it if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the malady at its head in your hand, and let it be close to the sun so that your work may be visible, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the base of the hair that requires removal and let it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before you extract it from above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair in from above and insert it into its place, and let there be one or two or three hairs and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand in so that the hair is removed and placed back into its proper place on the eyelid with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is placed back and the hair is not removed, pull it back to the sides below the field that you have prepared with it, so that it may be properly placed among the surrounding area.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And observe this with the eye's vision, for now you have placed back both the hair and the field, and stitch each part together, leaving the stitches for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows on that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is too short, now attach a long hair from the natural hairs to it, or leave it for some time until it grows longer in its place, and then raise it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of a swelling that occurs in the upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there appears a swelling in the eye, which is a contraction of the eyelid when it is closed, either to the right or left side, due to poor healing of an injury, cutting, or cautery, and this is called leporine. This swelling can be either natural or accidental, caused by improper healing of wounds, cuts, or cauterizations, or similar injuries poorly treated.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation is that you should cut open that contraction and separate its edges, then place between them a piece of linen cloth, and bind it there until it heals.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not advisable to use treatments for it that dry or constrict, as if you do this, the swelling will return worse than before and never heal properly.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use treatments that soften, such as fenugreek, and boil the leaves and seeds in water or use east wind, which should be mixed with some oil to liquefy it. Then soak a piece of cloth in this mixture and apply it for treatment.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The essence of your treatment is to ensure that you do not allow any part to become overly constricted and heal in a way that it does not maintain its original form.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have described is merely a correction of the swelling that does not return to its original form as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the treatment of ehacrati, which is done below the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This ehacrati which is made below the eyelid, which is properly called ehacrati; and it is of some natural, others accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	The accidental one is made by plague or by cutting or by cauterization or by other similar means.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation is that you take a needle with which to make double thread, and place it in the flesh, and pass it from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches the two ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then extend the flesh in the parts above the needle and cut along it with a broad spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then if you return the shape of the eyelid as needed, it is well; and if not, take a rod and place it in the cleft, and use that to convert the eyelid, and close the two fissures on the side of the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two fissures be from two corners of the incision, which you have made where they meet, and let there be a corner formed by them when they come together.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then remove the flesh in the amount that is the width below it, which stiffens the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with linen thread; and then treat those as we have said about softening medicines and plasters until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if through incisions, either by a cut or suture or cauterization, you must now make an incision in a straight line along the edge of the eyelid as was previously described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the membrane between the two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the speech on the treatment of incisions when they are above or below, let it run in the operation according to how the preparation of the incision was made, and that is in a form of various patterns.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled practitioners always prepare in every possible way within their means to return the figure to its natural form or close to it, and that patient according to the convenience of the operation and the instruments in the major dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in certain individuals such that the eyelid is adhered above to the sclera, and it is prohibited from easy movement and its natural functions, then you must introduce a probe below the eyelid, and elevate or extend it as necessary.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you incise the adherence with a fine spatula, which should not have sharp edges for the incisions, holding it bluntly so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and move the spatula gently so as not to damage the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be such that it gently separates the adherence so that the eyelid can return to its natural form, and ensure that the entire adherence is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And so you put in the wound salt water with which you wash; or distill in that of rose dissolved in the water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the wound with a scalpel, and apply on the wound wool infused in egg white, and on the third day use consolidating substances until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the swelling of the eyelid and the prominence of flesh around the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that an eyelid swelling occurs in two ways: it is either nervous, resembling a hard but fine knot; or it is non-nervous, resembling frozen white moisture, which when touched with a probe takes it up naturally without sticking, and it can be excised without the probe being left inside.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both types do not begin except from the greater tear duct gradually spreading to cover the eye and preventing light and the movement of the eyelid.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	But the method of operating on the swelling is that the patient rests his head in your lap, and then opens the eyes, and you lift the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the swelling with a probe by slight incisions and extend it to the parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert into it a hair from a horse or ox or cow, or something similar, or strong thread, and duplicate the tip of the needle slightly and place it in the center of the swelling, and penetrate with the needle, and bind with wax the swelling; and extend it to the parts above, and excise with the hair the edge of the swelling near the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you should proceed with the hair inside at the rear end.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you should incise the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small scissors, and leave the tissue of the tear duct intact so that by such an incision there does not result a continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail should be removed with the sun oncen extended or with fire, as we have said, and then it should be extracted with a lion's spatula which has this form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tissue and cause its rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then after the incision, place a small amount of dry salt or clean linen made of silk in it, and let that remain for another day; then treat it with whatever is appropriate until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not loose and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it placed in that manner, then this type of nail should be treated with medications, and it heals as described and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise that area, then you should open the wound of the malformation and take a fine spatula made of horn with sharpness according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with fineness.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it happens that it is rarefied and condensed and applied to the root, then distill from your own saliva onto the wound made of clean silk or linen or dry salt, and bandage the wound for another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then proceed with the operation by removing everything that is inside it, but if the opposite abscess is inflamed, leave that one alone for now and treat the beginning of the abscess until it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then proceed with your operation on that one for the reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	If the lacrimal flesh becomes inflamed and causes great discomfort in the eye, delay the procedure for a while; then incise part of it, but do not proceed with the incision too far so as not to damage the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a distilled rose water and sinew preparation to the lacrimal area until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of styes and what is born from flesh tightly attached to the eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	In some cases on the eyes of certain individuals, soft flesh grows and covers the pupil, or approaches or extends over the eyelids, causing them to come together from the inside, and it resembles the edge of a balcony.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation in this case is that the patient places his head on the surgeon’s lap; then open the eyes of the affected area and collect all that flesh at appropriate times, using forceps or needles; then incise the flesh at the beginning until it is completely finished with the scalpel, and be careful not to damage the eye during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision should be made with the scalpel we have recommended for nail surgery, or with small forceps with which hair is extracted, depending on the form that will be described in the next chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Thus when your incision is complete and the flesh around it is well scraped, now fill the wound with salted water, or sprinkle on it powdered rust and similar corrosive medicines, and leave a poultice over the wound made of egg whites so that it is protected from abscesses and cautery.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if for any reason the patient is prevented and the wound is guarded from cautery and you fear an abscess requiring cautery, then leave the wound and treat that abscess with whatever remedies are suitable for such an abscess, and subsequently proceed with the operation as soon as it is healed, and similarly deal with the flesh adjusted which occurs in this kind of wound.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must be careful to keep all treatment of the wound by natural or accidental means using iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member can endure the operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of pus in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Pus comes from veins that are rust-colored and whose operation is prohibited by the text, and the wound will heal over a period of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the wound in which there is pus is strong and whether there is no other illness but pus, then you should collect that pus.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to place their head in your lap, and then press those veins for one ounce or two according to your discretion; and let that pressing be of subtle duplication according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	And thus one ounce is administered gradually in a body according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then let those veins be collected with subtle force, with subtlety, and cleanse the blood gradually hour by hour until those veins appear empty and have been turned.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful that you do not lead the blood to the extremities of the body; and if your operation is in the morning before the sun, and you are firm in your operation, do not injure anything but those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed it, then you distill in the blood a sharp green or red herb because of its potency to dissolve what is stagnant in the body.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible for you to collect everything at that hour, then you bandage everything with something that relieves the pain, and leave him for several days until the pain subsides and he is assured of no abscess forming.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat on him according to the same method until he is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of nasal fractures.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat fractures with cauterization or with sharp medicinal heat as described and not healed, then do not proceed further in him but cut into the abscess after its maturity, and remove all the moisture that is within it and the pus until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And so when the bone and flesh are exposed in the corruption or blackness, now you must use an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called a rough head, and it is made of iron, and its head is round just like this one which is made with punctures by a file or rasp with subtle punctures (as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place it on the corrupted part of the bone, and then rotate it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped off.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And do this several times, and then treat the area with astringent and drying substances.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	And when the area is consolidated and good flesh has grown in its place, and the pus has been removed and it remains for forty days without being renewed or forming an abscess and no accident occurs, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, now there is no other way but to reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you expose the bone with a probe or sharp medicine, and when the bone is exposed, then you apply pressure according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the tip of the probe be triangular, and the shaft of it should be gradually tapered towards the tip as you see here.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place it on the bone, and let it be near the lacrimal bone; extend your hand slightly and then rotate your hand with pressure until it penetrates all the bone, and you will feel the pain because it obstructs air from passing through when you press it.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, at this time, restore the place with styptic and drying medicines as has been mentioned.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Thus, when the flesh and the place have become hardened, at this time the matter which was flowing to the sides returns to the wound, therefore this is easier for the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the prominence of the belly.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the belly protrudes in its entirety and no harm or reduction occurs upon pressure, then it is necessary to treat the patient by laxatives, and subsequently follow with ventilation on the head without scarification and use good suction; and afterwards apply a liniment made of aloes, sesame, and sarcocolla on the belly, and then strengthen the plaster over the belly with powdered materials.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method for the powdered material is that you take linen cloths of the pounded substance, and each cloth should be folded into four parts; and make from these powders.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then apply those one upon the other according to the quantity that the belly requires.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then strengthen over them with a strong cloth in tight binding; and repeat the suction with ventilation without scarification; and then remove the cups and leave the belly tightly bound day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if in the meantime the bandaging becomes loose, then it must be made tight again.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then remove the bandaging day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the swelling has already been reduced, that is good, and if not, then apply the poultice with the powders and the bandage and the cups until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the elevation of the uveal membrane.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When you find a disruption in the uveal membrane, and it is prominent and protrudes from the eyelids like a grain of barley, and its shape resembles that of a person due to this condition, and you wish to incise it, then perform the operation as we have recommended: insert the needle at the root of the uveal membrane from below and above. Then place another needle where the thread will be doubled near the lacrimal part, and let that penetrate while leaving the first needle in its position; subsequently, incise the location of the double thread and lift that portion of the uveal membrane around the needle, and strengthen it thus.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then remove the needle and place it on the swelling wrapped in an egg white cloth, and leave it there until the thread adheres to the uvea.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then treat the swelling with what comforts it until the illness is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes he applies a circular piece of cloth around the swelling over the prominent elevation, and then it is punctured with a fine probe to reach the center of the swelling, allowing the moisture to drain out, and the swelling subsides quickly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Then strengthen it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of wounds.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness which is called alconati is not the one referred to as scabies, which appears on the skin like water droplets descending and is not that particular condition.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treating this condition is to have the patient sit on a prepared and straight saddle. Then take his head in both your hands from two sides and move it so that the scabious secretion reaches the lower parts, and then let it dry without descending, and keep the light (likely referring to illumination or visibility), so that the patient sees the causes as he did before.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend below, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the scabious secretion does not descend as we have said, then have the patient sit between your hands and take a fine spatula and place it on the conjunctiva just above the ciliary body near the continuation of the conjunctiva to the cornea, so that the secretion is expelled.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once it is expelled, then you should apply cooled water in which you have mixed honey or water in which fenugreek and honey have already been boiled.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water descending from the eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already described the types of water in the division and which ones are suitable to be punctured, as explained in the discourse, according to health conditions.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now you should have the patient lie down on a bed and raise his limb, using a bandage to secure it.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And approach near to the eyelid of his limb with your left hand if the limb in which the water is the one on the left; or with your right hand, if the limb is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And approach with your right hand and take the probe if the limb is on the left; or with your left hand if the limb is on the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the tip of the probe near the crown according to the thickness of the bone in the white of the eye towards the inner corner, and then gently push the probe upwards and rotate your hand.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel when the probe has reached the intended depth.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And ensure that the distance of the probe to the preon is equal to the measurement from the pupil to the edge of the iris, which is the crown of the eye; for you will see through it with the vision of the eye by the clarity of the corneal tissue.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the probe into the location where the fluid is, and then pull it out once again. If the fluid drains immediately, now you will see that the patient's vision improves quickly, and remove the probe from the eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then wait for a short while; if the fluid has drained, now you should wait again until the probe can be removed without hindrance.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is stuck and does not come down, then you extract the magda with ease, and revolve with that your hand little by little, and then dissolve in water a little of clear salt from gemma and with that wash the wound inside; and then place outside the wound cotton or stopper or wool infused in rose oil and egg white and seal with that the wound so.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	And we and those who know of our time place on that as if thrice in egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey your magda to the instrument of the wound due to its hardness — for there are some men whose wound is hard because of this —, then it is necessary that you take the spatula which is called alberid, and this is its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And thus pierce with that the junction, and do not stop your hand in the trauma, and it is only so that you make a way for the magda to pass through.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then insert the magda as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should prepare the patient for rest in a comfortable dark room where they lie on their back, and all movements should be prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And place in the nature of that liquid so that it smoothens their nature, and do not let them turn their head to the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the bandaging be according to their condition within three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then untie that in that dark place and expose the wound to view, and show it to them some causes, and then retie the bandage within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not wonder that you should do this at the hour of the cure or soon after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Handle it in such a way that you apply this gently so that the water can penetrate quickly and powerfully due to careful attention.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess appears, you should then loosen the bandage beginning on the seventh day, and treat it with whatever substance counteracts the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Now you should cover his eyes and place a cloth over his face through which he can barely see for several days, keeping him in the darkest possible place.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then he should be moved from that darkness gradually and engaged in conversation about his concerns.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in surgery, the student is not exempt from performing certain procedures, and then you must be bold with the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has been transmitted to us by some of those who are knowledgeable about the art, that some say they make fire in the Aracus [or a similar term], which is perforated through which water is suctioned.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But I have not seen anyone in our land who has accomplished this, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is something new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the methods of perforation for those who are unfamiliar with them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or proper steel, and their ends are crafted with this fine triangular shape, the sharp end just as it should be.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of wounds to the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are various growths that differ from one another, among which is a cause that resembles the sting of a venomous insect or a polyp; and this disease is called polypus because it resembles the aforementioned condition.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And there is also a cancerous growth, pale and of dark color; and another that is reddish in color but not dark.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, for those growths that are not cancerous or false and are reddish in color, you should make the patient sit between your thighs and expose their nose to the sun, and starve the nostrils, applying poultices to those growths.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract it from the parts inside, and then carefully cut away what you have identified using a sharp scalpel until you know that all the affected tissue has been removed; if for any reason the excision is not possible, at that moment you should continue cutting with one of the finer instruments available until no part remains.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if bleeding or an accidental abscess occurs due to cautery, then you should stop what you are doing; or if it is a malignant abscess, then you should incise and cauterize it until the bleeding stops and all the pus has been evacuated.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then place some vinegar or water in the nose near the incision to cleanse it.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is swollen and moisture reaches the palate as a result, then you will know that it has healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh over the excess pus on the bones to which excision has not reached.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then you should mix thoroughly some resin with the substance that is to be inserted, and place in it nuts, and put between each nut the quantity of a finger or less, and make a hole and insert one end of the resin into the bone either with a needle or for another possible reason.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when this has been done, let its scent be drawn into the channels of the bone, and it should be applied to its surface, for carefully observing this action is like how children act in schools, and it is an easy cause for anyone who wants to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place the two ends of the resin, one end extending over the nose and the other remaining inside the nose, and then administer a layer of flesh around the nuts that are in the resin, and do this until you know that the flesh is covering the nuts in the resin.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the resin, and place near the bloodletting in the nose a small piece of cloth, and do this for three days or more until you see that it has corroded everything remaining from the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the treatment, place in the nose a lead tube for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you decide on a treatment that dries, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument for making enemas, from which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And there is in it something of silver or ivory, which resembles a small spoon filled, like a tiny bowl, and the mouth similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a tube closed like a reed, and the tube of the instrument for capisuction should be flat and open; to which there should be a handle at the back, with which you hold that when heating in oil or whatever you want from juices and suctionable causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these capisuctions are precious: recipe of beaver fat, white balm, ginger, and saffron pepper, long pepper, squill, spikenard a drachm each; mix them with the juice of wheat and hay, and make pills, and dilute one pill with hot water, and give it to the sick person lying down.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of thorns naturally found in the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Often there is a thorn naturally found in the extremities of the nose, and it is treated and removed on certain days within the period when such care is observed.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason you should incise that at the beginning of its appearance, and you should treat all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then pause over the place where you cauterize or apply burning medicine, which is at that location.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if the incision is delayed until it has become hardened, hard, dark in color, and with little sensation, then do not touch that with iron as it is a chronic abscess; for often such harm comes to those who incise this abscess improperly.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is due to touch and is not of a dark color, and sometimes incision is possible in all that area, then evacuate the pus and make an incision there without fear, and treat the place with something that dries it up until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On suturing the nose and lips and the ear when the continuity is dissolved by plague or similar condition.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when dissolution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, few will undertake such an operation except in some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when there is any cause for these conditions, consider whether it is a fresh plague with its own blood, and then you should approximate the two lips of the wound with sutures, and afterward treat it until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the continuity dissolution are already separated, and each is made healthy, then you should scrape each part of its visible edge until blood comes out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then approximate the two lips with sutures and strengthen them, and over those apply powder of dragon's blood and sprinkle it, and place on top a piece of mastic plaster or some other consolidating plaster, and leave that dressing for two days or three, and then remove that and change the plaster and leave it until the pus is completely evacuated, and afterward treat with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the method of suturing is that you approximate the dissolution of continuity either with needles as we have recommended for abdominal sutures, or approximate the dissolution to the pus as seems appropriate to you.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the extraction of those causes that cause swelling in the two lips in the partitions within.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Often in some men there appear in the partitions within their lips certain hard swellings resembling the gristle of birds, and some of them are small and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you should turn the lips and cut into each of those hardnesses from all sides, and immediately fill the place with finely shredded cloth so that the blood is constricted, and then wash it well with something astringent, until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the incision of flesh that is adhered to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Often there arises on the gum flesh that is adhered to it, which the ancients called "albulus," then you should suspend that with incisions or with forceps and incise it down to its base, and allow the pus or blood to flow.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then apply to the place finely shredded cloth or other astringent or drying powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, for afterward the cauterization will prevent its return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the extraction of teeth with forceps.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth in the partitions within and those outside, and between the adhered gums, there are rough spots, tartar deposits, and often they are blackened and become green or yellow due to corruption, causing the teeth to form tartar.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And so you should make the patient lie between your thighs and place his head in your lap, and cut the teeth from which these abscesses arise and cause sand-like substances to come out until none of them remain, and do this for blackness and yellowness and other such things until they are cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Then if it is still in the condition from the beginning of the treatment, that is good; but if not, at this time you repeat the treatment on those [teeth] on another day and on the second and on the third until it reaches the final stage as you wish.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you should know that the teeth have the need for various forms of instruments and different shapes according to how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And because the razor with which the tooth is cut from inside is different from the razor used to scrape between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare as you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the Extraction of Teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	When you treat the tooth of its pain with total gentleness and delay in its complete extraction, because there is no cause that can replace it once it is extracted, for it is a substance sublime that cannot be dispensed with in the extraction of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, you must be firmly certain which tooth is painful, for many times the pain deceives the patient and he thinks it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one but immediately the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, as we have already seen by the operation of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Thus when you are satisfied which is the painful tooth, and once you know well, it is necessary that you incise around the tooth with a spatula of some virtue, until it dissolves from the tooth the gum entirely, and then remove it with your said tools or with fine forceps little by little until you have removed it completely.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then use strong pincers for good leverage or a firm grip, and place the head of the patient between your knees so that you have it well without hurting them, and then pull the tooth straight in such a way that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And so if it is not loose, now take one of those instruments and place it underneath from all sides with ease and exert effort to remove the tooth as was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is fractured or decayed, now you must cover that fracture with cloth and secure it at the end with a thin thread so that it does not break during your compression on it with forceps.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you must act carefully when incising around the entire circumference of the gum and guard against using too much force so that you do not break it or leave part of it behind, and return to the patient because of the malice that it be better than the initial pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their attempt and audacity during the extraction, without administering what we have recommended; for many times they cause great evils to sick people which are harder to treat, and the roots of them exposed entirely, or some of them, or that you extract it with some bones of the jaw as many times we have witnessed.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And after the extraction let the mouth be washed either with vinegar or with something agreeable mixed with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if blood flows because of this, just as you do for similar wounds, then apply some quantity of wax and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that does not suffice, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and holding them delicately with which the tooth is grasped at the beginning should be long in length, short in handle, and thick, so that they do not bend when using them to work.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should be like rings with thick handles such that when you grasp them, they are not bent; their extremities should be short.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of Indian iron with straight extremities, and at the extremities of those there should be teeth, some of which fit into others and grasp firmly by constriction, and sometimes the extremities of those are in the shape of a bird's beak called ciconia, which is a hawk, and they are very strong in their grip.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the extraction of teeth and the removal of the bones of the lower jaw.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a tooth that is attached for some reason, it is advisable to place a poultice on the area for one day or two until the site becomes softened; and afterward use such forceps or holders with extremities shaped like the beak of a bird called ciconia or hawk, the shape of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	Their extremities should be treated internally as well as externally.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if he does not obey you to attempt this with these forceps or tenaculae, now you must cut above the root and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument called atali, which is a small lever whose form is as follows:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let it be of short thick length, and do not hide it so that it does not rattle.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Then if by this the root is removed, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular end in which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a finer end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now assist with this instrument which has two prongs of which this is the form as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which I will describe for tooth scraping; because useful is made this instrument which resembles a large file, and this is the form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular end twisted or short, which has some thickness, and do not hide it so that it does not rattle.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And know that the instruments for tooth extraction are similar and likewise resemble other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the skilled and subtle artisan discovers for himself according to what he understands from the operation and various diseases; for there are diseases about which the ancients did not say or leave a proper instrument, due to their diverse forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the bone of the jaw or any other bones in the mouth is fractured, or if pus appears, at that moment you should proceed with care using those instruments and forceps which we have described for extracting tooth roots, and assist him as follows:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is any swelling, reduce it gradually, and keep the area in the mouth compressed so that it does not spread or escape until all the bone is cleaned out; then restore the place with appropriate medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is only a small abscess in the bone, then remove that part which is abscessed and discolored, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of teeth that protrude beyond the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth protrude beyond their natural alignment and especially when this happens to women, particularly to those of advanced age; therefore, you should consider: if a tooth is too close to another tooth and it is impossible to file or cover it, then remove that tooth; but if it is not attached to the adjacent tooth, then cut it with an instrument of this shape; it resembles a pig’s snout and is made of Indian iron with a very sharp point.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And when your incision is made such that you cut it over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and ensure that it does not become inflamed or affect other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the protruding tooth can be filed down, then file it with an iron rasp of this shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it be of Indian iron and the margua exactly; and let it be of small points as well, like a file with which needles are made, on which the tooth is filed little by little over several days with ease, so that it may not become another tooth or be deformed.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And apply strips to it at the end, and shave it with razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth of which a part is broken and the tongue touches it, now you must file away that inside where the sharpness of that fracture is, until it is smoothed and evened out, so that the tongue does not hurt itself and the speech is not impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of deformed teeth with gold or silver filling.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When it happens that the front teeth are loosened and moved by impact or accident, and the patient cannot bite on what they eat, and you have treated them with astringent medicines, but your treatment has not been effective, now in order to prevent them from falling out, you should reinforce those that are stable with gold filling and not silver, because silver can turn green and after some days it may fall off, whereas gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the filling be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the restoration is that you take the filling and place twice as much between two healthy teeth, and then build up with two tortuositates of the filling between one or multiple deformed teeth, until it reaches the adjacent healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	From there proceed with the tissue into the part from which you began, and stretch your hand with ease and skill so that it is not harmed.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your thread be such that when you stretch the fiber of the teeth, it does not escape.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut off the excess part of the thread using forceps or scissors, and attach it at each place with your fingers, and twist and hide it between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then sew it as tightly as a Roman would.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it comes loose or breaks, stretch that or those again with another thread throughout its time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of two healthy teeth and two damaged teeth, as you see them tied:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it happens that you return one tooth or two near their proper places, and they grow back as we have recommended, and they heal.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And only skilled artisans and wise practitioners can do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes a similar shape is made from the bone of an animal, and it is placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is stretched as we have said, and remains and serves there for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the incision of the band that goes around the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligature which was mentioned above the tongue either belongs to those that one is born with and are natural or are accidental and occur due to a disease that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation is such that men open the mouth of the patient, and place their hand inside; then they raise the tongue, and then cut that nerve ligament horizontally within so that the tongue may be freed from its attachment.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or node in that area, and this has remained due to the healing of an injury, then you should incise it and cut along the horizontal so that you have separated the ligament and dissolved the node.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to make a cut in the surface of the skin so that you do not sever here an artery and cause bleeding.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the remnants of the incision with cold water or vinegar or salt water; and afterwards place a piece of linen under the tongue; thus, the patient should hold the tongue down against something each night so that it does not heal in another manner.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if bleeding occurs, apply over the area vitriol powder; but if the blood flows continuously, then cauterize the area with a hot iron, which is appropriate for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then proceed with the treatment using other methods until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the Extraction of a Ranula Below the Tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	At times, an abscess appears below the tongue, resembling a small swelling that impedes the tongue from its natural movement; and it grows so much within a short time that it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	In the operation where you have the mouth of the patient sixty degrees toward the sun and observe the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of dark color or black, hard, in which the patient does not feel sensation, then do not touch that which is gangrenous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is inclined towards whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you place the incision in that area, and cut with a fine scalpel, and cut it from all sides; and if blood flows during the time of your operation, then pause and apply three times vinegar, which is vitriol, until the blood is restrained.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have properly treated it, and wash it with vinegar and salt; and care for it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from both ears and those that are in the throat and other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When you encounter an abscess in the throat, which are glands that are somewhat assembled together, some of which appear outside and are called the tonsils. When you treat them as we have said in the division and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, dark colored, with little sensation; then do not touch that part with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the base is thick, then do not touch that part with iron due to the flow of blood; rather, let it remain until it has matured, and then either you will remove it or it will burst on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, hard, and the edge of it is subtle, then that is what should be cut into.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is to consider before your operation whether the abscess of it has healed after cauterization or if it has been reduced in some way; and then make the patient sit facing the sun, and his head should be turned towards you, and hold open the mouth of it, and the assistant takes with his fingers the tongue down with an instrument of noble material which has this form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or iron, and it should be thin like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then as you press with that the tongue and the abscess is shown to you, look directly at it with your own vision, then take some of it and place it in an almond, and pull it out to the sides as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or take some other cause of the tunics, and then cut it with an instrument which has this form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it resembles forceps, however the ends of it are curved, thus that the opening of each of those is in line with the other, sharp, made of iron.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not present for you, then cut it with a scalpel which has this form: It should be sharp on one side and not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have cut one side, cut the other in the same manner of cutting, and then the patient should rinse with water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If blood flows, guard and use water of the decoction of haws or myrtle leaves and similar to those styptic causes until the flow of blood is restrained, and afterward cure it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes pus appears in the groin or other abscesses or those two armpits, and incise them as is said about the incision of two breasts similarly.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I had treated a woman with an abscess which had appeared in her groin, the abscess was tending to a dark color and was insensitive, it had already closed her groin, and the woman was breathing very narrowly, and I had prohibited her from eating and drinking water, and she would have been near death if I had not intervened for one day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had swollen so much that it formed two ridges from which pus flowed out through two openings.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I decided to operate immediately and inserted my finger into one of the openings, and extracted that, and then I incised at the base of the other opening, and then I closed it, and compressed its tongue, and then I placed the plug in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I excised a large part of it, and only a little blood flowed from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then the groin of that woman was absolutely fine, and she began to drink water immediately, and soon after ate food. Therefore, I did not need to incise that abscess again for a long time, and subsequently an abscess appeared in its place, which I had to incise to prolong its healing.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Thus I cut and cauterized the wound of his leg, thus ending the procedure; and afterwards I walked around not knowing what God had done for him at that time.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter xxxvii.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the incision of an apostemated swelling.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When one calls to the swelling, and it is apostemated and elongated, it is then called perpendicular; and if it is below thick and round, it is then called a bubba.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and your treatment does not conform to it, and also when the apostema cauterized remains subtle, then you should incise the one that is aggregated and round; and if it extends in length, and is sanguineous, of dark or black color, and is not central, then you should attempt its incision because there is fear of malady in such cases.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it according to the method I have described regarding its whiteness and length, make the patient sit down and press your tongue against it with an instrument that reveals its form and then place the thumb on one side, pull it downward, and incise it with one of two instruments mentioned in the double incision procedure.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And you should not incise it beyond what is appropriate according to the natural term without cause, for if you incise too much, you will harm the patient.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And after the incision, use what we have recommended for the double incision procedure, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient is afraid of the incision, use an instrument in the cauterization of him without fear, and the way of the cautery on him is nothing but sharp water, and that you place the head of the patient on your thigh, and then press his tongue with the instrument which we have mentioned, and then take the water which we have said in the chapter on cauterization, and confirm it with this cause living, and place it neither thick nor thin, and with that fill the concavity of the instrument which has this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the extremity of the instrument be such that it is placed in the cavity as with a ladle's concavity, and place the instrument with the medicine on the tongue, and the patient lies on his back so that saliva or mucus from the mouth can flow due to the intrinsic medicine, so that none of this flows out from any cause onto him and thus causes harm.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then touch it with your hand on the medicine, and press that onto the uvula for half an hour until you see it become blackened and numbed by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take a cloth and wrap it around the end of the reed, and dip the cloth in the medicine, and insert the reed with the cloth into a tube so that the cloth adheres to that tube, and do this many times until you achieve what you desire from the cauterization of the uvula, and then leave it as it dries and falls off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and after the cauterization wipe around the uvula with a cloth dipped in honey, and modify it with that which is around it from the medicine, and wash it with wiping water, and treat it outside with embrocation, and take care of it with bandages until it heals.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of treatment is safer than incision and less painful from fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	In some cases, the uvula is treated with something that is milder than cauterization and incision. It is cured by sublimation in this manner: take a poultice of ysope, origany, rue, Arabian saffron, chamomile, ground seeds similar to these herbs, and adjust all these causes or some of them into a flask, which should be submerged in sweet wine and boiled. The flask should be heated moderately, and in the middle of the flask place a tube made like this; it is made of silver or reed.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the end into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor reaches the uvula, until the uvula is sufficiently treated.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And repeat this procedure several times until it is dry. Be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the onset of abscesses, as it would be too harsh for the abscess. You should not do this; instead, you must declare the abscess before cauterizing.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if this instrument is not available to you, take a cane and attach a hollow tube at the end of it, so that the mouth of the patient is covered, as the hollow of the tube prevents the vapor from entering the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and what adheres to the gums and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Move carefully around the collarbone or spine of the patient or for some other reason.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then look at what is visible among those things, upon which your eyes focus, and then press the tongue with an instrument in front of sunlight so that it may be revealed to you what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat, try to make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because a strong cause adhering near the throat will easily be expelled by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of bread or some lettuce leaves or a dry biscuit; or give the patient a piece of dried sea sponge, and bind it tightly with honey, then let the patient swallow that, as it passes to the place where sharp spines are and is extracted, thus it will be easily expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take an eel and bind it with honeyed thread, then place it inside and gradually extract it; or take a probe and gently insert and gradually move it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if it is not expelled using the methods we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead in this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be as thick as a small reed, and at the end of it there should be a curved part that you can easily insert into their throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And let the patient lie with their head raised up, and be careful not to touch the bone of the throat, so that it does not injure the patient or cause pain to the bone or spine, or allow the physician's hand to do so.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, let the surgeon use honey, because of his knowledge of the place where the cause is attached and embedded inwards, and he inserts his hand with the instrument into it, all this according to the quantity which has been prepared for him until it is expelled.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter xxxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the Extraction of a Bloodsucker Attached to the Throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When treating a bloodsucker with what we have mentioned in the division of treatment with medicines and not compresses, consider the time of day when the patient's throat is exposed to the sun, after you have loosened their tongue with the instrument that we recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then when you see the bloodsucker, remove it gently with a small incision or with subtle gestures carefully.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to remove it then, take a concave tube and insert it into the patient's throat, and immediately place a heated iron in the concavity of the tube, and do this as many times (until the bloodsucker is dead and falls out of the throat) and keep the patient from water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a vessel full of warm water and open the patient's mouth over it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not let anything from it pass through, but pour out the water one hour after another with your hand, as soon as the bloodsucker feels the water, it will grasp onto it.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	However, if it is not expelled with what we have recommended, then smoke the patient with cymin or with asafetida using the instrument that we recommended for smoking the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	In this, so in what case.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another method of operation in suffigation with that one, which is that you take a jar in which are burning coals and the jar is covered by a cloth in the middle of which is a hole, and it is prepared on that hole the end of the instrument; and then place the suffigation above it; and have the patient put his mouth at the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the suffigation does not escape until you know that the suffigation has reached the blood-sucker, for the blood-sucker will immediately fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not work, now you repeat the suffigation several times, and abstain the patient from drinking, and give dry foods like salted almonds, and do not let him drink water, and in this regimen it is necessary that he be kept.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which the blood-sucker is treated when it is seen in the throat; and it resembles forceps as you might see them, but it has some curvature.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed in the throat, and the end of it resembles the beak of a heron, which is sharpened with a file, so that when it presses against something, it does not slip.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the discourse on the preparation for abscesses and their incision.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are of various kinds, in many ways, as will be recalled for each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And there are various ways of puncturing and incising them by two methods, one of which is for the specific type of abscess within itself; and by what they draw from the humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is for the locations where accidents occur in the body, for an abscess that occurs in the head is different from one that occurs in the buttocks; and an abscess that occurs in a fleshy location is different from one that occurs at a joint; and each has its own treatment through surgery.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And there are some abscesses that should not be punctured but left until the pus has properly matured or they have reached a suitable condition.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And there are other abscesses that should be evacuated when they are crosswise and not mature according to their proper condition, such as those near joints, because when an abscess approaches a joint, its nature is prolonged into the surrounding area, and if it corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, it becomes a cause for contraction of that limb; or it may be close to a principal member, and if you delay puncturing it until it matures, it will harm the principal member; or it may be near the buttocks, so puncture it before it matures; but do not puncture it when it is raw, due to incomplete digestion, except for that which is near the buttocks, so that you do not cause a prepuce and extend it into the inner parts of the buttocks, thereby creating a fistula, or leave it until it heals improperly.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	It is important that you know the right time to puncture the abscess, and this is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you should know that it is mature when there is relief from pain and the cessation of fever, along with a decrease in hardness and pulse, and the sharpness at the head of the abscess, as well as other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you should know that the incision must be made in the place where the pus is below the abscess and coming from the swelling.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the incision should always be made along the length of the flesh or body if the abscesses are in the parts of the arms or legs, and in places like joints, tendons, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all similar locations where there is no reflection; for in those that reflect, use an incision according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is better to delay the incision until the digestion of the second stage is confirmed, as we have said; for if you make an incision before that, the course of the patient's illness will be prolonged and more severe filthiness will result, and thus the lips of the abscess will become hardened and its depth increased.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some abscesses should be incised according to the width of the flesh or body due to necessity, or according to what that member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you should administer a small incision in small abscesses, and in large abscesses a larger or wider incision, or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And in other abscesses where it is necessary for the condition to be excavated and incised, when it is done as if with bread and is completed at a time when it already exists, just as in the case of those that occur too frequently like boils and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised in a section having three corners; and of those where it is incised as if in the shape of a maple leaf, such as the abscesses of the armpits.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And there are those in which a round section and a crescent-shaped section are administered, and similar ones to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But in the case of one that is not a core as are superficial abscesses and tumors, you should puncture it with a superficial incision or simply scrape it.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has collected pus, you should puncture it but do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted a portion from it, on another day scrape the abscess inside, and then extract a larger portion, and continue doing this several times according to its degree until it is healed.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is a robust man, or a pregnant woman, or an infant, or an old person in debility, for the vital spirit in such cases is easily resolved by the evacuation of the pus, and the patient may die quickly, so you operate on them carefully.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Therefore, guard this chapter with great caution, and when you make the puncture in which you puncture these abscesses, you should clean the plaques and then consider whether the plaque of the abscess is small or a flat section; if so, you administer some of it or antiseptic cotton. If the abscess is large and the cracks from the puncture are many, then you should apply medicated plasters to each one until they heal.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the cord is divided or has been hollowed out around its circumference, then you should pack it with old cotton or thread made from linen, as when you have treated pustules or boils without moisture; and strengthen that on the third day; and then proceed to treat it according to what is needed from ointments until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If blood flows during the time of your operation, then administer water, wash and prepare cloths in which you dip a cloth, and place that over the location of the bleeding for several times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the bleeding persists, then you should administer treatment and cure with powders which I have recommended in various places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is near many nerves, then you should infuse powders in vinegar and cauterized oil, and place those on the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the locations are fleshy, then you should place powders mixed with water and oil or with vinegar and oil, and let all of this be washed internally for three days as we have said. Then you should open the abscess, cleanse it, and administer to its cure what suits it until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction I have already said about every abscess in which manner the way of its cure is by separate chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On the section of abscesses that appear on the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the neck of the head, small abscesses appear, and there are various types of nodes that contain tunics; and the types of these nodes are many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they are soft, and contain moisture similar to jelly.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	Of those things which contain moisture like dust, and similar to them; and of those things which are stony and hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all things, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, as the extraction of those does not contradict nature.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you express them with an instrument whose form approaches this, which is called an entromes, until you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what it contains is moisture, then you should divide that with a section according to its length by making a superficial section according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin the section from the line of .B. to the line of .G. When the moisture has been evacuated, then you should excise that skin which contains the moisture, and do not leave any part of it behind, for if any part remains, it may cause issues later on.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse the piece in Egyptian oil if it is available, and if not, in salt water. Fill the wound with this and leave it for another day, for this will dissolve all that remains of the membrane.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply the Egyptian oil to that piece again, thoroughly and repeatedly if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining part of the membrane. Then care for the wound with the oil until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if an abscess contains hard nodes, then you should incise it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a section having the shape of a cross, and insert once between the two lips of the incision and scrape it thoroughly, and exert your effort in extracting the membrane that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If it happens that you encounter opposition in surgery, now do what I have recounted first of all.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, treat the suppurated abscess by incision and cure as we have told you; and the incision of a suppurated abscess is easier because it contains little blood and less moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes there are some abscesses in the head of certain people where there is not much moisture; the cause of this is that I once incised an abscess on an old woman's head and found it as hard as a stone, rough, white, which could not be pierced, and if someone were to strike it, they would hurt themselves.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other abscesses that occur in the head, this is not the case with this chapter; also, for abscesses that come to children's heads and behind their ears, the incision of all these should be superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the incision of those in the lower part so that the contents of the abscess can drain into the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then treat those as is appropriate for that cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the incision of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These abscesses often occur in the neck, armpits, and groin; and sometimes they also appear in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck often develop between the muscles, and every scrofula among them is within its own proper membrane, just as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	Of these kinds of scrofulas there are spots, for only some of them are stony, and of those only contain moisture, and of those are the malignant ones which do not obey cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Then in that one which you find to be well disposed during the examination, whose color is manifest and matches the color of the skin, and it is soft throughout, not attached to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and it is not purulent; ensure that you incise it superficially along the part above and below the body in line with .G. between the line of .B., and scrape out that one thoroughly from all sides, extending two fingers' width beyond the edge of the skin if necessary, as we have said regarding abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is safer that the vein or nerve not be incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatula not be sharp, so as not to cut your hand during the incision or disturb the patient, and do not incise what is not necessary; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and had to stop your operation, then apply a vinegar trissas or other powders that cause bleeding from the wound, and staunch the bleeding, and leave it so that the acute phase of the abscess subsides and the swelling becomes mollified and begins to soften.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the bleeding has stopped.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation and complete it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then ask the patient at that time if there is any cause for other small scrofulas, and if so, incise those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the scrofula a large vein, cover that hour so you do not incise that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	And cover so that you bind that one firmly with a cloth bandage and loosen it when it falls by itself without harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already immersed in Egyptian oil, and then treat that area.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise that scrofula completely, then cover so that you bring the two lips of the wound together and sew them up immediately so there is no room for any superfluity.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is room for superfluous fluid due to the size of the scrofula, then cover so that you understand to incise its root, and evacuate it and administer sutures as has been said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those scrofulas that contain humidity, perforate that one with a superficial puncture where the site of maturation appears to you, and pause in puncturing so as not to reach the pus at the bottom of the abscess, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer puncture, wash with appropriate liquid and substances for those, so that it corrodes what is left of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound already cleaned, now you treat that with a healing ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the incision of the pustule of an accidental abscess in the groin.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	Thus did the ancients call this section in the epitome, and no one has seen such an operation in our land.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those people.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In cases where men have a tendency towards it, avoid the extraction of the epilhot, as doing so would not be beneficial because all the veins and major vessels are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have abscesses in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the illness is not in the bone, it is advisable to use the section of the epilhot to avoid loss, which is done by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want this, cut the epilhot below three circles of its own circles, or four if it is a small section along the latitude in that which lies between two circles in quantity, so that the section is in ciphac, not in cartilage, and this place is suitable for cutting because it lacks flesh and the blood vessels there are thin.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is cautious, it is advisable to first extend the throat skin by about an inch, and then make an incision into the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any reason to do so.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut the ciphac as we have recommended; and it is significant regarding the section of the canal by the membrane which is from that place where it is disrupted and by the division of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And let the wound be left open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Thus, when the hour arrives in which the perforation is feared, join two lips of the edge of the wound, and cut there alone except for the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Al-Bucasis says that the essence of what we have recounted is to see that some of these abscesses have already obstructed the airway of the patient, and the patient has come close to death, and their breath is cut off, and some will incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the site of the wound by some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And by this command, allow the wound to be open until the malice of the disease is consumed; and the malice lasts for three days; therefore, at that hour, command to close the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and cut in her throat, incising part of the windpipe, and I was called to treat her. I found the wound as it would be on one near death, uncovered the wound, and saw the blood that had come out of the wound a little.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Thus, I confessed that she had not cut a vein or artery, and the air was coming out of the wound, and I treated her until she was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And nothing happened to the servant except that her voice became hoarse, and after some days she returned to improvement in her disposition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Here I say that in the section of the episiotomy there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the section on abscess which occurs in the groin outside, and is called hernia of the groin.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess called hernia of the groin is a large abscess according to the size of the body, and it occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it happens in two ways, for it is either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, there is no need for treatment.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental case happens in two ways, one of which is similar to fatty knots, and the other way is similar to an abscess caused by arterial obstruction, and in that case there is cause for fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And one should not attempt to treat it with iron unless it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should proceed with caution and investigate it as described. If you find it similar to fatty knots and not attached to any veins, then incise it as you would for nodes and extract it using water or something that cleans the area; and if not, then thoroughly examine its nature, and subsequently treat the area with what is needed for healing until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the section on the kinds of knots.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	There are various kinds of knots, and I have already mentioned all their types in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	Here is the translation:
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Thus I say that an abscess is caused by heat and fever and very strong pains until the boiling of the excess matter ceases; and it completes putrefaction when at that time the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But this one is not heat nor fever nor pain, and it resembles that which happens in the lion's wound which is inside the thigh.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it depends on the color of the skin, and its beginning is like a pimple and it forms in the same way whether larger or smaller, and there are two types according to their nature, dry or fatty, and they contain moisture, and the colors of moisture vary, as I say in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you reach the treatment of this condition, express it and inquire about its beginning, which is called an intrusion, as its form will come in the chapter that follows this one.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes, which is that you take this intrusion and insert it into the most humid part of the area where you find the abscess, and you will rotate it little by little until you know that the intrusion has already penetrated the tissue.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And subsequently withdraw it according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and then extract the intrusion and examine what has come out in its wake.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the flowing moisture, of whatever color it may be, is found, then you shall incise it at a superficial section as I have said regarding other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture in the wake of the intrusion, then you will know that it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And draw on the dried surface a section having a cross shape according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	So that you have been taught, and suspend that section by threads, and scrape off the skin from all parts with ease, and keep the fleece or sack if you can over it, and extract that pus at the knot.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is ruptured during the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and you should then apply dressings for this, and now you will extract it in pieces until none remains by any means.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if it bursts for any reason, little or much, the knot will return according to the most likely scenario.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that it bursts in some small part, now apply the wound with some caustic powders and strengthen the wound, and place over it something suitable for treating an abscess by cauterization, and treat it with another method until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the knot is large, now you should cut both sides of it and treat it with what promotes healing.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if a pulsating or non-pulsating vein is opposite it, now you should cauterize and fill the place with triply refined vitriol and leave that open for two days or three until the wound has become clean and the blood ebullition subsides; then return to incising what remains of the knot.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of the instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those, there are forms of instruments, which are of three kinds: some are large, some are medium, and some are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of inserting instruments is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of medium insertion is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of small insertion is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Make them of iron, of aluminum, with properly curved ends so that they facilitate the instrument's insertion into the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are called albered, and one of them is called berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three kinds, for among them one is large, medium, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large experienced one is as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the medium experienced one is as follows:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small experienced one is as follows:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	They are convenient for abscesses, excisions, fistulas, and boils, as they enter those areas which are among the bones and from other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they make hooks, thick ones, lions (likely referring to a specific shape or tool), as well as large needles like those used for sewing saddles, and they are made of citrus thorns, or thorns, or iron, or silver. The best ones are when they are made of citrus thorns.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made of black feathers, which are used to probe fistulas in the curvature of which there are reflections, as their lightness allows them to be reflected in those areas.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And there are three kinds, for some of them are long, and others medium, and others short, depending on the quantity and width of the fistula and the tightness of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the large experienced lead plate:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the medium-sized experienced lead plate:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small experienced lead plate:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the hooks are of one kind made of special pieces, four of which are simple kinds, to each of which there is only a curvature, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And their hooks are of one kind, and they are of three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those hooks which have two curves, and they are of three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those which have three curves, and they are of three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of a large simple hook, its form:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a medium-sized simple hook:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small simple hook, its form:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a large hooked plate:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a medium-sized hooked plate, its form:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small hooked plate, its form:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a large hook having two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a medium-sized hook having two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small hook having two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of an incision having three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a medium-sized incision having three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small incision having three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpel blades with which nodes and abscesses are incised, and there are three kinds: one is large, one medium-sized, and one small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of the medium-sized scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of the small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those with which section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not blunt, nor placed in such a way that they might cause hesitation during the incision of nodes due to fear of cutting into a vein or nerve. And through these, the patient may be healed and find some peace because of the adjustment that occurs after the incision of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of forceps, and there are three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the large forceps:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of the medium-sized forceps:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of the small forceps:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of iron and resemble reeds from which alcohol is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And at that sharp end, there is a punctured area where the spoon is hidden, and in this way it connects to the parts inside and outside, as you see when you want to.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulae, which are hidden among the said fingers for the puncture of abscesses and I do not perceive them as bad for patients, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of ligatures with which the blood flow is interrupted, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; the forms of these:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They should be made of fine citrus thread, round with some length, and they should be delicate.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that these kinds of ligatures be large, medium, and small, so that with them the blood flow can be interrupted quickly when needed, and at times when there is no other medicine available.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to interrupt the blood flow in all parts of the body, and use them only in fleshy areas such as the sinews of the arms and legs, and the sinews of the shoulders, and the breasts and abdomen and similar fleshy sinews.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes these instruments are made of other small tools similar to fish scales in this form; with which the blood is interrupted when performed for phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round in this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of the breasts of men which are sometimes like those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some men have swollen breasts when they begin to sleep and continue swollen. And similarly the breasts of women are assembled and become what we call Roman nipples, hairy.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who need this, cut it in a lunar section according to this form, from the line of .B. to the line of .G., and then scrape away all roughness, and then fill the wound with flesh-growing medicine, and then sew together the two edges of the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the breast inclines to the sides and is soft due to its size, similar to how it can be in women, then cut it into two parts with its pus removed, in two sections resembling a lunar shape, each of which should fit within the other at their ends, such that one line contains the other according to this form from the line of .B. and the line of .G. Then scrape away the edge between the two lips of the wound, remove the fat, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders necessary for healing until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the patient's restlessness and blood flow, then fill the wound with cloth soaked in corrosive liquid and leave it until that corrodes what remains of the fat, and then care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the Incision of Abscesses That Appear Near the Testicles.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that appear near the testicles are of the type of scrofula, hard, and they contain a skin that is sac-like.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those few that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised in a crescent shape according to this figure: from the line .G. to the line .B. And when it is completely evacuated of what is in the abscess of the wound, then fill it with boiled wool and leave it for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the wound should be dressed and treated with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the glands or scrofula is present, then you should incise it as we have said in the section about scrofula equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the inflammation has spread to the point of putrefaction, then administer cautery as we have previously described.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the Incision of Abscesses That Occur Due to Artery or Vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured and the surrounding area has become inflamed, an abscess may occur. The signs by which it can be known whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: for when the abscess is due to an artery, it tends to aggregate in the front part of the body; and if you press on the abscess with your fingers, you will hear a hissing sound.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And an abscess due to a vein is round and appears on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the incision for this abscess is dangerous, especially in areas behind the armpits, in the angles, and in the neck, as it can be quite risky; therefore, its treatment should generally be avoided. For those that occur in the extremities or on the head, it should also be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	May it be done upon him who is of this due to inflation of the artery opening; cut in the dry section along its length; and near the incision with an inch or so from the artery, and release the tunics until it is uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And near place upon him the needle and make that penetrate into the other side, and tie the artery with two double knots at two places, — which cause I showed you in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then press the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula so that the blood escapes entirely from it, and let the abscess be dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer treatment in which pus is generated so that the ligaments fall off; and afterwards treat that with appropriate poultices until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess due to a vein section, then you should have in your hand what is possible of the abscess at that site, and afterwards insert the needle below the place where you had held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and tie it off double with thread so that you can extract it from the other side, and then ligate the abscess with a strong bandage as I have told you regarding the grapevine bandage on both sides of the thread's ends.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	And if you fear that the thread might be extracted, then insert a knot with the needle below the entire abscess beyond the initial insertion of the needle, and tie four knots.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And then dry the abscess in its middle part so that when what is inside has come out, you then incise the excess tissue, and leave what is attached.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then pause and apply powder which you have mixed with vinegar and oil, then proceed to give the treatment which is done with cauterization and bandages until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter on the abscess which occurs due to twisting of the nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Just as an abscess can occur in arteries and veins, so too can an abscess occur in the nerves when they are struck or due to excessive hard work, and similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is done to alleviate this in the areas of the helper bones or the heel, or in any place where the joints are usually painful.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the surrounding tissue, and it is among the worst conditions when it is constricted by inflammation, and the patient seems in a state of stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess that aggregates in the front of the body, and because of this there is no pain localized to one area, but rather it pains throughout the entire body without being confined to any particular part in front or back.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, when it is in the joints, it should not be treated with iron, for it will quickly lead to contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But for the one that is in the head or on the forehead, relieve the pain with spatha (a type of powder or remedy).
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small abscess, then treat it with poultices and lance it to drain the pus.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if it is large, then suspend it with incisions, and scrape that area, and afterwards cut it open; and close the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter I.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the incision of an abscess which occurs on the cheek that affects the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Therefore, some people are troubled in their abdomens and other parts of their bodies with growths which are called fungi due to their resemblance to mushrooms; the root of these is subtle while the head is large. And often the lips of these grow together, it is so for small ones as well as those that are magnificently large.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one such case where there were two growths in his abdomen that resembled mushrooms, and there was no difference between those that were white and had a small root.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those growths were inverted and would split open, and moisture would constantly run from them.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, I incised those growths and found inside one weighing about eighteen unciae and the other about ten unciae.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the procedure during the incision of such growths is to consider whether the patient is humid and if the color of the growth is white and humid with a subtle root. Then you should incise it with a broad scalpel while being present yourself to cauterize it over fire, because moisture from the incision needs to be expelled; and if blood flows, cauterize that area.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the patient pale and fearful, be cautious about incising it with a knife. Instead, take some fresh lead solder and apply it to that growth in the manner we have described, and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Adjust the strap tightly around the lead wire; therefore, do not stop strengthening the thick lead, until it is severed and falls on its own.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the lead is of great thickness, then during its incision there is some cause for fear and dread, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you may sever half of it, and then cauterize the remaining part so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then treat it until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to presume to cut lead that is of dark color, with little sensation, and relatively soft, for such is often cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And this will serve as a reminder of certain important points regarding that.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LII.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of a hernia of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	A hernia of the navel is caused by various reasons; either through fissures in the abdomen above the belly, and from it comes the membrane or bladder as in other ruptures; or due to a wound from which blood flows from a vein or artery depending on what is present there; or due to trapped air.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to a fissure in the abdomen and the protrusion of the membrane, then the color of the swelling is similar to the color of the body; it causes little pain, and subsequently appears in various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the protrusion of the bladder, then its condition differs greatly from what we have described, and when you press on it with your fingers, it retreats; and quickly returns afterwards. It is light in weight and becomes prominent especially after bathing and hard work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	May it be if by moisture, the hours are like a lion and are not hidden when pressed with your hand, nor are they restrained, nor are they created.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is by infection, the hours with these signs appear as an abscess turning black.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	May it be if it is by flesh that has decayed, the abscess is severe, large and hard, and is situated in proportion to a quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	May it be if it is due to gas, then the touch of it is like a lion.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to an infection from an artery, or a vein, or gas; then you should be cautious about treating it, for there is fear and dread as I have taught you in the chapter where I have described abscesses from arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the membrane, then you should command the patient to lie on their back and stand extended; then press your finger around the circumference of the entire navel, and then command them to lie face up with their hands under their buttocks; then surround it with a piece of linen about an inch wide around the circumference of the navel where you have marked with your finger; and then extend half of the abscess upwards from this point by about one inch; and then tie it around the circumference with strong thread or cloth in a proper manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then open the center of the abscess over the dressing and insert your finger into that area to check for the intestine; and if you find it adhered or protected by the dressing, then carefully remove it and push the intestine towards the inner parts of the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the cloth, then take one ounce of it; and incise the excess.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	And if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then encircle that spot, and return to your operation; take two needles and place in those two strong threads and insert the two needles into the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a crisscross manner, which you should make penetrate; and then compress the abscess into four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area open so that the extended flesh can drain and fall off by itself; or incise it when it is thin enough to drain, and then treat it with a lotion from among those mentioned until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is of flesh or due to moisture, then you should treat the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or moisture that you find there, and then treat it with a lotion that will heal and consolidate the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De curacio de cranc.	On the Treatment of Cancers.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said in the division about the types of cancer and how it is approached for treatment with medicines, and that it is difficult to cure without it becoming ulcerated; we have also discussed cancer arising in certain parts and the care required for its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that in some cases cancer can be in a location where its eradication is possible, just as with cancers located in the mammary glands or in the scrotum and similar parts of the body allocated to removing all of it, especially when it starts small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When you are old and gray, do not try to apply it, for I have never been able to heal anyone from that condition nor have I seen another who has, nor has anyone else reached that state.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation should be performed when it is appropriate as we have said, which is to precede by allowing the patient to purge from black bile several times, and then if an obvious swelling is found, drain that.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with preparations in which the operation will take place, and then apply hooks to the area where they are needed; and afterwards, clean from all parts with a good linen cloth for thorough cleansing so that no cause of infection remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And allow the blood to flow, and do not cut that area hastily, and press the spots, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is available to you among the tools.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if it is contrary to let thick blood flow from a vein or artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood stops, and afterwards treat that with other methods until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 46.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the Treatment of Hydrophobia.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended in the division of the types of hydrophobia caused by water, and the symptoms of each type, along with the treatment for it using medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And the one that can be treated with iron is only the single type of convulsion caused by hydrophobia, and it should not be approached with iron for the types affecting the tympanum or the ydropica, because those are fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this kind of tympanitic dropsy with medicines and do not confirm your treatment, now consider whether the patient has reached a state of debility, or if they suffer from another illness that is also a form of dropsy, such as if it affects their chest or abdomen similarly. At this point, be careful not to treat them with iron, for there is danger in doing so.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you see the patient is robust and there is no other illness except for this simple form of dropsy, and they are neither a child nor elderly, then the method of the operation on them is that you lift the patient between your arms, and have an assistant press the abdomen of the patient with their hand, squeezing out the water from below the navel, and afterward take a spatum with sharp edges according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should have two sharp points that are long and taper to a point like a spatum; however, it should also gradually become narrower, so that during the operation you do not penetrate into the bowel, and thus harm the patient.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider whether the generation of dropsy is from the bowels; if so, you should distance yourself from the navel by three fingers' width during the incision, below toward the pubis.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of dropsy is due to a kidney illness, then your incision should be to the left of the navel by three fingers' width.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is from the liver, then your incision should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not advisable for your incision to be on the side where the patient lies, so that the fluids do not flow to that location and cause harm.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Here is the translation:
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And I perforate the cyst so that it reaches the space where the fluid is.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument which has this form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or ivory or lion leather, at the lowest part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end of it is cut like a pen tip, as you can see.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the uppermost part of it is a ring, because when the instrument reaches the fluid, then immediately the fluid will rise on the instrument, thus evacuating only a small amount of fluid at once, for if you remove too much in one go, the patient may die due to resolution of their vital spirit, or it may lead to imminent death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate that according to the amount of strength of the patient and according to what their condition, the strength of their pulse, and their general health indicate to you.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and cover the fluid that causes it to be retained by the ligature that covers the hole over the cyst which you were instructed to perforate according to that method.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the procedure on another day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small amount of fluid, and do this for several days with caution, and be careful not to leave too much fluid remaining.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you are concerned about the patient and allow a large amount of fluid to be removed, then bury it in fine sand, and apply sweat baths; and expose them to the sun for a long time; and treat them with drying medicines until they are healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	About cauterizing on the stomach, and the pus and the rectum near the removal of water, as I have recounted in what precedes.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 51.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	About the treatment of children who are born with unopened passages for urine.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes some of the children are born from their mother's womb with the head of their urethra not pierced (or it is narrow or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, one should cauterize for the piercing as soon as it is born with a fine powder according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then place a fine lead pin in the opening and secure it, and keep it for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wishes to urinate, he should be cleaned and allowed to urinate; and then return the pin.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which passes over the area will not clean this opening.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But for the one whose opening is narrow, he should be treated with a lead pin as we have said, for enough days until it becomes enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But for those in whom the opening is not in its place, as mentioned, the cause of this is that when born, the urethra is behind the tip of the penis so he cannot urinate freely until he lifts his penis with his hand to one side; and it is not due to generation, because thus the sperm cannot reach the mother properly, and it is a minor illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	Here is the translation:
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And guard yourself that in your operation for bleeding, you do not make a mistake there; and pause at the time when you cut off the blood, and cure the wound within so that it may heal.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	About balanus, which occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and about corruption, blackness, and adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Often this balanus occurs on the penis as a soft fleshly prominence.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant: suspend it for a moment and cut off that part until it is completely removed; then pause to apply a poultice with Egyptian onion; afterwards, treat it with a cleansing agent until it heals.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the balanus is malignant and discolored, then you should administer cautery around the base of it and its circumference.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the balanus is on the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis head, and one part of the balanus is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove the part that is inside at the beginning until it is stabilized; and then treat the part that is outside, because when you treat both parts together with the foreskin, it is not guaranteed that it will not be damaged.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if blackness and corruption occur in the genitals and foreskin, then you should excise all that is discolored, about to become corrupted, or already corrupted; and afterwards, apply a poultice over it using honey mixed with ground and sifted wheat bran and barley flour.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And so treat that one along with the other treatment until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If there is bleeding, now administer lunar cautery according to this method:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because beneficial cautery is in two positions at once, namely for bleeding and for the plague when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the urethra is corroded and completely destroyed at that moment, now it is necessary for you to insert a lead cannula into the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in one whose foreskin is such, and for whom circumcision is not required; and when it occurs due to an illness or abscess), you should use blunt forceps until the attachment dissolves and the head of the penis is fully released.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to distinguish them precisely, now you should use forceps gently on the head of the penis and the foreskin. This is because when the foreskin is thin, it can be easily pierced due to its delicacy.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis using a fine thread, which should be moistened in water so that they do not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then treat it with styptic herbs until it is healed and consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVI.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the cleansing of children and the treatment of what occurs during circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution involving the cutting of continuity as other diseases do; however, since it is part of our procedure and our will, and since that operation is specifically for children, it is necessary to determine the best method and the least painful way to achieve safety.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books, because they do not use it in their laws. The reason is that we have acquired this through experience. For this reason, I found most artisans and barbers to circumcise and clean with a razor and scissors; and they use ligatures with wax and incision with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already prohibited all these methods and did not find a better way to clean with scissors, using ligatures with wax during circumcision than with the nail, because most times you avoid the disease above, but the disease of the foreskin has two layers, and remains below the skin. Further light incision can lead to certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in the cleaning method which is done by alphabetists and is digital, used by barbers, there is no assurance against cutting the extremity of the male member, because it easily leads to injury inside the groove.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with the nail, it is easy to err and corrupt your procedure.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and most times they are born in such a way that there is no need for circumcision, and I have seen that.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But with the circumcision done with scissors and ligatures with wax, the goodness and experience reveal themselves to me. The scissors are of proportional incision, so that the sharpness above is as the sharpness below; therefore, when you press your hand according to the two sharpnesses proportionally and make an incision accordingly at one time, it is done in such a way that the compression with wax encompasses the foreskin entirely without error.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the method of the first operation is that you make the child sit if it is one who understands a little, so that you only tie the thread on his penis, and leave that for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make him happy in every way that is possible to him according to his understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make him stand between you, prepared in such a way that he is not afraid; and hide the scissors in your hand or keep them out of sight, so that the child does not see them or any other instrument.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into his penis and blow on it, and pull that in so that the head of the penis comes out, and then clean what is accumulated from dirt.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then tie the marked place with a thread doubly, and then ligature slightly below that the second time, and then hold the finger and indicate the place of the ligature tightly below, and incise between the two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then raise the blow gently and extract the head of the penis; and then let the blood flow little by little, for it is better; and apply powder above and on top of the powder place a cloth soaked in mutton grease mixed with recently squeezed rose oil; and leave that on until the next day; and cure that with treatment until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the scissors used for cleaning is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let one pair of blades be blunt and the others sharp, so that the point of the blade does not come out, and let the length of both edges be equal to the length of two fingers equally.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in cleaning is that you remove too much of the inner lining, either all or part of what should remain after incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you should apply the poultice for as long as your hand can hold it due to the swelling of the area, and then incise it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold the poultice with your hand, then apply it for one hour and then incise it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed and the swelling remains below the groin in an abscess, then you should leave it until the pus has matured, and then incise it with ease, according to what is prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the head of the groin, for it should not be done that way.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore, treat it with the powders that the plague consolidates, using those we have recommended in the chapter on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised too much from the lining, and you follow the parts above, do not pay attention to that.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And therefore, treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to stones or hardened sand, or due to pus or blood, and similar conditions as those we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and there is retention because of a stone which is already in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent over on their heels.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place the patient's feet on their buttocks and stretch out their abdomen from above their back, and have the patient strain as much as is possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the neck of the bladder is forced to expel the stone towards the rear parts, so that the urine can be released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if the stone is not dissolved by the water we have mentioned and the cause is urgent for the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction with an instrument called a siringua, which has this form: It should be made of silver and be slender like a reed quill, as thin as a sparrow's feather but half the length of a palm, at the end of which there should be a fine tube.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of testing the urine with it is that you take a thread and tie it at one end to the wool or cotton firmly; and place the ends of the thread in the lower part of the siringua, and if necessary cut any excess length of the wool with scissors so that it can be inserted into the tube. Then gently insert the siringua into the bladder through the urethra.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And have the patient lie on a chair, and lift the bladder area with oil as a lubricant, using olive oil and rose water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the siringua with ease until it reaches the opening of the urethra; and then bend the urethra above its midpoint; and then push the siringua into it; and then push it further until it reaches the bladder, and ensure that the patient is positioned so that it goes directly to the empty space, and if this order is not followed, the instrument will go where there are tortuosities.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And gradually extract the lint along with the wool, for the urine dissolves the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And when you extract that, use urine for treatment, and use a tube; do not stop using the tube until the bladder is emptied and the pain begins to be alleviated.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Regarding the quality of enemas for the bladder with an enema device and similar instruments, which are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or frozen blood clots within it, or a constricted fistula, and you wish to introduce water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	But at the end of it, it is blunt, that is its closure.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that part there are three parts: two of one side, just as you see.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning, it is concave, in which that which is to be introduced should fit, according to the quantity that needs to be inserted, without addition, until when any cause draws out the moisture, it is drawn out, and when it is expelled, with this water it is expelled, and when it is expelled far, as the clampcedra does which is fitted with naphtha in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to introduce moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the moisture, and draw with it the water that is introduced to the sides above, for the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then insert the extremity of the plaster into the groin as we have recommended in the circle; then apply the moisture with the water that you use, for that moisture will reach the bladder soon, and the patient will benefit from it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the instrument with which the bladder is treated is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or lead, with the head being similar to a small feather, and below that, thin threads.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take a bladder of the patient, and place in it the moisture that you want to treat in the bladder, and then tie it tightly between two with strong ligatures made double, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then insert the extremity of the instrument into the groin.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then place your hand on the bladder with the moisture, applying gentle pressure until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you do not have a bladder available, take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; then pierce it all around its circumference; then tie strong threads through those holes, both ways; then place in that water or liquid which you want to use for moisture, oils, and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then tie that to the instrument as you did with the bladder, and apply pressure with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of stone extraction.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already mentioned in the division the types of stone and their cure with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, and the signs of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have described the stone in which this operation is performed and its section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And here I will narrate that with clear exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, I say that stones generated in the bladder mainly affect children; and among its signs is that the urine expelled from the bladder resembles water in its fineness, and it contains small particles like sand; and the patient scratches his penis frequently, and he urinates little by little, and then it becomes painful; and with these words you will have understood this.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is easier to treat children with that condition before they reach fourteen years of age; and the treatment is difficult for older individuals.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in younger people it is somewhat easier because they are between those extremes.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And for the one in whom the stone is larger and the treatment is more difficult; if it is small, the opposite is true.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, to reach the treatment of this condition, we begin by preparing the patient with a diet that eliminates all foods that may prevent the passage of the stone due to their inquiry.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Regarding the malady with its associated pains and swelling, and discomforts, so that the stone may descend to the neck of the bladder, or jump from place to place several times.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then place the patient in the position you have prepared, and let him lie with his back raised from the bed, so that the bladder is made to incline towards the lower parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then examine that and all inside it.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	When you feel the stone in its place, then immediately proceed to act upon it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not get a clear sensation from the beginning of your touch, then it is necessary that you anoint your index finger with oil, using the left hand if the patient is a child, or the right hand if the patient is an adult, and insert it into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And examine the stone with your finger inside.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually turn it little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press upon it with your finger and expel it towards the outside from the place where you intend to operate.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand; and instruct another assistant to extend the thighs outward with his right hand, and with his other hand to pull back the skin that is in front of the thighs, near the location where the incision will be made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a probe that has this shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and cut in the place that is between the anus and the genitals, not at the middle location, but towards the left side of the thigh; let the incision be made on this stone and your finger be in the anus, and make a transverse incision so that the external part of the incision is wide and the internal narrow according to the quantity which can be taken from the stone as much as possible, and no more, because you must easily press with your finger which is in the anus the stone against the place where the incision is made, and it will come out without difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that some stones have sharp angles and edges, because of which the extraction of them is made difficult by this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that one it is like a spherical acorn, and it is round, and its extraction is made easily.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Then for that one which has sharp angles and edges, adjust the incision along the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it does not come out easily, then you should devise something over that, or apply gently with a suitable gesture, the end of which is like a file with which you press on the stone, and do not move away from it; or insert an instrument with a curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot do that, then slightly enlarge the wound, and if you see blood flowing, apply it gently with a solution of dissolved vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if there are more than one stone, then at the beginning you press your hand to the bladder opening, and subsequently make an incision over it; and then gently push near that area; and similarly proceed if there are multiple such stones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if it is a stone of great size, the ignorance lies in your cutting that which is large and dry, for one of two causes afflicts the patient: either he remains or he becomes affected by the continuous distillation of urine, because the place is not completely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	Administer the expulsion of what is inside so that it is expelled, or devise in the fracture of the bone with forceps to extract it in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then when you have completed your operation, now fill the wound with juice of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place upon that wound soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water, so that the abscess may yield.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then raise the patient on their elbow, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have loosened it, wash the wound with water and little oil, and then care for the wound using egg whites and honey until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound an abscess occurs that is hard and corroded, and it appears as if the blood is frozen in a bladder (and this is known by the exit of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if you leave it, it provokes the corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with sour wine, water and salt, and apply whatever is appropriate for its healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	In all the stages of treatment, you should apply both the treatments and adjust the medicines that are prescribed for the condition.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the urethra, and is stuck there, and urination is prohibited, then during treatment you should do as I recommend before proceeding to surgery, because many are accused of overstepping with this treatment; but I advise against it, and what you should do is take a smooth iron probe, which has the following shape:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a triangular tip, sharp, and inserted into a handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take some wax, and attach it to the penis below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the urethra, gently until the probe reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the probe with your hand on the small stone gradually, and you should make the incision until it penetrates the other side; for the urine will be released immediately.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on what is above the stone at the front of the urethra, for that area is constricted, and it will be opened to allow urine through, and the ailment will be cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some reason that prohibits it, then attach a piece of wax below the stone and another piece above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then cauterize above the stone in that urethra between two bindings.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Here is the translation:
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then remove the bandage and clean the clotted blood, which is done on the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to bandage the stone after removing it, except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other bandage above it should remain, because when the pus is released near the swelling of the stone, the membrane returns to its place and heals the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason, when you bandage the pus above, you must lift the membrane to the upper parts or return it gently, so that the wound heals as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the Extraction of Stones from Women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if a stone is found in any of them, the treatment is difficult and is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One reason for this is that women have a narrower passage.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second reason is that you rarely find a woman who openly tells a doctor if she has such issues, whether she is unmarried or married.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third reason is that you rarely find a woman skilled in this art, especially the operation itself.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth reason is that the site for the incision to remove a stone in women is far from the location of the stone, so a deep incision is required, and this is risky.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity compels you to do this, then it is advisable that you consult a skilled female physician, as few are available.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are lacking in that [instrument], then seek out something subtle, or present a midwife woman who is experienced in the matters of women, or a woman who has been properly trained in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, present that [instrument], and command him to do everything you order him to do, starting from the examination of the stone; the reason for this is to determine if the woman is a virgin, then it is necessary that he put his finger in her rectum and feel for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if he finds that [stone], mark it below his finger, and then command him to incise upon that [mark].
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and examine the stone, placing her left hand on the bladder, and carefully grasp that [stone].
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if she finds that [stone], then it is necessary that she gradually extract it from the opening of the bladder to the partitions below as far as her strength allows until she reaches the root of the stone.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then incise at the location of the middle of the vagina where the root of the stone is, regardless of its position, and fix the stone in that place so that the finger does not move the stone when marked below it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at first; then insert the probe into that incision, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the incision according to the amount by which you know the stone will be expelled from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the types of stone are many: for among them there are few and great, and lion and sharp, and long and round, and having ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you should know how many kinds there are of the thing about which you speak to signify upon what you wish.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see blood flowing, apply vitriol thrice to that place and keep it there for one hour until the bleeding is stopped, and then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure you prepare with you the instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of stones from men, so that you are assisted by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see blood flowing, and you know that the bleeding is from the artery that was cut, then sprinkle powder on the place and bind it with powders and moderate pressure, and do not repeat this; and leave the stone and do not extract it, for the patient will surely die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And when the sharpness of the blood has subsided after some days, and the place becomes clean, then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of the section on treating hernias.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia is nothing but an aggregation of moisture in the white tissue below the arch of the groin muscles, which is called a sac.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	In some cases, it is on the proper inguinal region which nature has prepared in the part of the groin, so that one may think it is another groin; and this is the ligament of the genitalia between the white fat which we have mentioned, and this is not otherwise said.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the genitalia, because this matter effuses into them, and sometimes it happens due to impact upon the genitalia.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has various colors, for its color may incline to citrine or to blood-red, or reddish, or it may be black and thick, or it may be watery and white, and these are what they are.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one knows where this aggregation of water is such as follows: if it is in the white fat which we have mentioned, then the abscess appears roundish slightly elongated like a figure of an egg, and the genitalia appear, because the moisture covers that from all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper inguinal region, then the abscess appears round at the part of the groin, and for this reason one estimates that it is another groin.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the ligament of the genitalia and the white fat, then it lies below the center.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then you should observe the color of the moisture in the abscess around the incision through which its form is revealed; and according to what is seen in the traces of the incision, judge about what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of iron wounds, it is necessary that we command the patient to be bled if this is possible for you, and then wash the body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And let him lie supine on his back on some raised surface, and place clean sheets below him.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And you should stand on the left side of him, and command an assistant to stand on his right, who will extend their hand across one of the flanks to the root of the thigh and to the part beneath the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a broad splinter and split the root of the thigh from the middle location along its length towards the wound.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And the incision should be made equidistant from the line that you should follow on the skin of the thigh, until it reaches the white fatty tissue beneath.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And probe that area, and observe carefully so that you do not injure it; and your probing should be as deep as possible without causing harm, and examine the wound thoroughly according to what is possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the fatty tissue with a wide incision to allow water to drain, and extract all the fluid.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate the two edges of the incision with forceps, and extend the fatty tissue to the surrounding areas; do not touch the root of the thigh beneath it, and dissect the fatty tissue in such a way as is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And dissect that area completely or in pieces, particularly the inner side carefully, for if you do not examine it thoroughly during the dissection, there is no assurance that the fluid will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If you proceed to suture it outside of its socket during your operation, when you have completed the cutting of the urethra, return it inside and then adjust both edges of the genital seam with a suture, and afterward treat that as you would other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the testicle corrupted by some other illness, then it is necessary for you to ligate the vessels which are near the suspensory muscle, and extract the testicle, and afterward treat that as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the swelling is divided into two parts, then you will know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part as you did in the other similarly; and if it appears to you that an operation should be performed, then perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you wipe away the blood, and insert into the incisions wool submerged in oil or olive oil; and place over that another piece of wool which you have soaked in vinegar and oil, and spread it over both genitals and the abdomen; and cover them with folded cloths and poultices, and bind those with a bandage as follows:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then take two cloths and fill them with crimped wool as described; and make the edges such that they are pressed by wood or wet cloth, and attach them to a structure in the waistband of the trousers, and one end of the edge reaches towards the buttocks between the two sides, and the second end reaches towards the part of the thigh, and both ends on two supports behind, and two other ends over two corners, and all the attachments should be secured to the waistband of the trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of cutting with iron; and that you take a thin knife-like cautery and incise with it the edge of the genital area, and heat it as we have recommended until it is revealed the white tissue containing the fluid, and then take a cautery shaped like this:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it resembles the Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce that tissue, and heat it until all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the tissue with forceps, and excise it with forceps, and excise it with a thin heated cautery; and incise it as much as is possible for you until all of it is removed; and be careful that the fire does not touch it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and longer-lasting in terms of blood loss, and better than an operation involving cutting.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if it happens that an abscess forms during the time of cutting or during cautery, or there is excessive bleeding, then you must treat whatever complication arises accordingly, with treatment suitable for it as mentioned.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is weak and does not dare to undergo a second operation due to its horror, then administer a puncture as I recommend; and this is when you are certain, by what we have said about the signs, that that hernia is fluid-filled.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then you should have the patient sit on a raised cushion, and then puncture the abscess at its lowest part with a scalpel, and extend the puncture according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the incision be wide enough to allow all the fluid to come out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then place pressure on the site of the cut and tie it there, so that all the remaining fluid can come out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then take care of that wound until the illness is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is resistance to the escape of the fluid at that time, you pierce it: and this is done only because the white membrane in the opening of the wound creates resistance and prevents the exit of the fluid. Therefore, you should place a needle or instrument used to extract fluid from cysts, as described earlier; or apply pressure to the wound with something small.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the fluid returns, and it happens again after about six months or so; and when it accumulates, then it should be punctured according to the same method, for in this way the patient will pass his days until it subsides.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the incision for a flesh hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the incision for this hernia there is great danger of serious harm in major cases; therefore, it appears to me better to abandon it and save the patient by not proceeding with it.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I recall the operation in that case and the specifics of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses occur in those parts where the genitalia are composed, and this happens for various reasons: either due to acute, harsh moisture that is discharged into the genitalia, or due to impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	The color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and there is no relief from the pain, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	A pus-filled abscess is very light in weight; its color is dark, and there is no relief from it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes abscesses are caused by the coagulation of arteries, and by the inflation of those that have already been perceived in this way, or by the inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But what is caused by the inflation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it does not need to be touched further.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But what is caused by the inflammation of a vein does not disperse because of compression with the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible to make a section over this type and over other parts; you should incise the skin of the thighs, and nearby there are veins above, extract the white ligament, and release the suspensory ligaments, and tie them, and incise the suspensory ligaments so that you can release it from all directions.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the vein has already joined with those tissues and is consolidated, now you should extract the vein and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion between any part of the ligament or between what is between the vessels, now you should release all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if it is a natural growth of flesh in the place of the adhesion that is behind, now you should incise all of that and extract the vein as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Thus when your operation is complete, now fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; and afterward care for it with other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernias that involve the abdomen.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is an abscess wrapped in some covering similar to a boil, and it makes difficult the exercise and walking due to the pain.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, one must be cautious due to what preceded it.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, one should proceed with the operation as they did with the first ones.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And he says that you should have the patient sit on a raised chair; then apply bandages to the scrotum below; and then use your hand to pull the genitals upward with force; and have another assistant do this while you do other things, extending them vigorously.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then incise with a sharp, broad knife across the line where the veins are visible to expose the vessels.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then carefully cut away from all sides as we have said in the extraction of arteries, which is done on the flanks.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then insert a needle with double fine thread into those areas, and tie it at the first place where you acted upon it, and tie it again at the last of these places.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then incise those areas in the middle with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated from the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Regarding the treatment of wounds, in curing other wounds where you wish health to be generated by what falls from vessels, which injure one of two genitals, for it is not wrong because of this.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If it happens that all the vessels are affected, then it is necessary either to extract the testicles or for the testicles to be separated from the vessels because of this cutting off of nourishment by the severing of the vessels, and they must wither, or for what will not be beneficial among these.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that happens in the caphac extended over the abdomen near the angle of the abdominal cavity, so that some of the bowels protrude through that rupture.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the caphac or of its vicinity, and these two types occur for various reasons: by impact, by jumping, by shouting, by lifting some heavy object, or by similar actions.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is due to the extension of the caphac, is that it happens gradually over a long period of time, and not suddenly, and it appears as an abscess equal within the groin because the caphac compresses the bowel.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it is due to a section of the caphac, for at the beginning it causes sudden severe pain; and it appears as an abscess different from one near the navel, and this is because of the protrusion of the bowel, and its body outside beyond the caphac.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	In some cases, the membrane is separated from the bowel, and this type of intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	In some cases, hernias are caused by gas, and in other cases they follow the path of a bowel fissure where they are trapped, causing great pain to the patient, and often cause severe discomfort especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of this type of illness with iron, there is fear, because it is advisable to avoid its use in such cases.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The method of the operation for this condition is to instruct the patient to push the bowel back into its place with their hand inside the affected area. If it obeys and returns to its proper position, then lay the patient on their back and raise their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Then apply a ligature to the cord that connects the testicles, and incise the cord of the testicles along its entire length; then place hooks in both sides of the section as needed to keep it open.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section, according to the quantity that is possible for you, is separated from it as much as necessary.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then carefully remove the tissue around the cord of the testicles until the white hard structure on each side is exposed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Now insert your finger into the area where the testicle is located, between the white structure that is behind the cord, and between the adjacent structures, to loosen any adhesions in the area behind the testicle.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	From the side of the testicles towards the parts behind, and with this extend the white thread on top to the left hand, and raise the wound above the thread at the part of the section; and command the assistant to extend it upwards while you dissolve the adherence that is behind upon completion of the solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And search among those things to ensure that there is no cause of the intestine wrapped around the white thread hard.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause for concern, then you should push that back into the lower abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle with seven thick threads, and insert it at the end of the white thread which is below the testicles, where the section is; and then cut off the parts that protrude beyond the needle so that there are only four threads remaining, and then arrange some of them in the shape of a cross; and tie those threads to the white thread we have mentioned as being below the testicles firmly from both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the threads and tie them firmly so that none of the vessels nourishing those parts can transmit any cause for harm, thereby preventing an abscess from occurring.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And make another tie at a distance of three such lengths from the first tie; and then leave on the white thread that is below the testicles the length equivalent to the size of a finger, and cut off the rest in a round manner, and remove the wound.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then incise in the part below the testicles at a section from which blood and pus flow as we have described in what has been said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	Take the lint soaked in oil and apply it to the wound; then apply the bandage we have recommended (and some poultices made with white cerate are cauterized, as we mentioned concerning the incision of pus, since sometimes such accidents happen) and leave the bandage on until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the cleaning of it is delayed, hot water should be applied and placed over it until it falls off as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And regarding the treatment of the wound, follow the other methods for treating wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	On Ventral Hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this type of hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has dared to treat it with surgery.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the earlier practitioners said that it should be treated as we have recommended for hernias involving the intestines; which is to ligate the vessels near the section where there is ease in doing so; and then dry up the swelling in the nearby area with something that will cause it to drain, until the vessels fall off.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the Incision Made in Hernias.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes there is a rupture in the hernia as we have said, and it becomes evident in that location.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And they do not assign any specific cause for the sac in hernia cases; and even if they do, it is rare; and it returns at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the time is prolonged with it, adjust the fissure in the sphincter within which descends the bowel into the sphincter; and this happens due to the extension of the sphincter, as we have said, which is in the angles, because the sphincter is stretched out, and accordingly it becomes soft and there is swelling.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment for it is with cautery as was preceded in the narrative.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this method: the patient lies on their back between the thighs, and then the area of the swollen abscess rupture is dried with section across its width according to the measure of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then stretch the white sphincter that is below the rib so that it becomes uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the cautery and place it on the prominent part of the sphincter, and press it to the pain in the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then cut the two prominent parts above the tip of the sphincter, and join them with sutures one to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the tip of the sphincter, and do not cut it completely from the sphincter, nor extend the tissue, nor any other cause such as I will explain to you in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat it as you would a wound, and when you incise the abscesses, clean it and restore the wound until it is healed; for the sphincter is contracted and the swelling of rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this case, for it is closer to healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the Softening of the Cord of the Testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In many cases, the cord of the testicles is softened because the flesh within it is also softened, and this requires careful management.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for the one seeking its cure to lay the patient according to his position, and then raise the entire cord that is softened above the natural cord; and then adjust two edges with sutures.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, in the beginning, remove the excess of the softened cord with three or four stitches and secure it firmly with sutures.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then incise between the sutures; and subsequently treat for other injuries until he is healed and the pus has subsided.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	On Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, yet for certain reasons it has been read to me and I remember it in this book; and the remembrance of it is not necessary except in two ways: one being so that when asked about it, the physician knows how to cure those who suffer from it; and the other way is that we often have a need for castration in other animals for our benefit, such as horses, oxen, pigs, and similar beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore, I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by crushing or by cutting.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the case of that which is done by incision, the way to proceed is that we should cut the animal in warm water until its genitals are softened and loosened and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand inside until they are relaxed and do not appear below the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In the case of castration done by rupture and section, make sure you hold the animal and press the root of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then grasp the suspensory ligaments, and incise each one with a section until two processes are carried out.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then incise those parts that you have each peeled back.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave on those of the spermatic cord any cause for harm, but rather the fine cord that is over the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better than the one done by incision, because incision often leaves some cause from the testicles for which the animal desires to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then take care of the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is when it appears in the space between the root of the testicles, in the area between two testicles where there is a figure resembling that of a female, including hair.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	In some cases of that vein which carries urine from which is in the cord of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women there is a special case: the womb of a woman above the pubis is like two testicles of a man, a little more towards the inside just as the buttocks of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one kind for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	It is that you should incise those tight tissues so that the pus escapes from it, and then treat it as you would other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind for men, of which you have urine that is in the cord of the testicles, there is no treatment or operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	About hemorrhoids and protruding flesh due to causes in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Severe hemorrhoids are tightly attached due to natural causes, making it difficult to treat and requiring careful management; in some cases, they become enlarged in women to such an extent that they prolapse similarly to men's and cause issues during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then you should grasp the excess of hemorrhoid with your hand or with forceps and incise it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not incise excessively, especially near the root, so that it does not cause bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	This flesh that emerges is the flesh born in the cavity of the major part within which it fills, and it easily spreads to the parts outside according to the appearance of a tail (and thus I first called this "tail illness"); therefore, we must cut it as we would with an intestine, and treat what lies inside until it be healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	On the Treatment of Abscesses.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Abscess is what occurs when the female organ is not perforated or the passage is small.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	It is accidental due to a previous illness, and that is caused either by flesh that is too tight or by a thin or thick obstruction.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It occurs either in the front part of the major organ, or on its sides, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part, and it prohibits intercourse, conception, and childbirth, and also easily prevents menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the diagnosis of that condition is made by examination with a speculum, if the obstruction is apparent, proceed immediately; but if it is not apparent, then inquire about it through your questions or with an instrument.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to a thin membrane and it is located between the two lips, then you should examine and rupture that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you should place pillows on both lips, and then gently place your fingers between them to examine.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should lie on her back, with her legs spread apart, and then gently spread the two lips to rupture that thin membrane and open the obstruction.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Take then the bandage and immerse it in oil and place that over the area, and change it daily so that the incised area does not become consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the swelling is large and thick, now you should incise it with a scalpel or with a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the obstruction is due to food, now suspend it for an hour, and then incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use the medicines that stop blood flow from a bite, such as hystiatia, dragon's blood, and onions, mixed with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Then administer a lead tube that is wide so that the wound does not consolidate too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep that for several days and administer dry heat to it.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then treat it with the other method of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes it happens in the larger birth of other tissues, and now you should incise according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is due to a chronic abscess, then with the chronic abscess that is in the larger area, do not make any opposition with iron in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids and similar conditions that occur in the anus of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are an appreciation of the openings of small veins from which blood flows continuously; and as for old hemorrhoids, they form tumors.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	Here I have said in the division of the species of those and the signs of those, and to say also those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and piles which are only in the region of the greater and do not appear to the touch, at this time it is not possible to perform cure with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those which are in the opening of the anus, on which one can feel by touch, these are those that can be treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary that you place the woman in a sitting position to wash and then extend the hemorrhoid with forceps, or with a rough cloth, and incise those with razors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder should be applied to those areas that stop the flow of blood from one of the powdered substances used for incisions without chewing, such as acacia and similar ones.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then bind the area with a dressing for one hour, and afterward place it in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then have the area treated with a decoction of sumac and rind of lemons and gallnuts and similar substances.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of barley and apply it with honey and sour wine to make a plaster on the back of it.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is congealed, that is good; and if not, apply it to two sides, and at the nipples without incision.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and apply it to the area with juice of cilantro or juice of anise or juice of wild parsnip in sour wine, and attach it to the location; and afterward treat the place with ointments until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May this be of some help to you in regard to rough treatment, so that you insert what appears suitable to your view according to what I have said about it equally.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure him so that he may be healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the Incision of the Bladder in Accidental Cases Affecting the Belly.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various kinds of abscesses occur in this area, such as gangrenous, lithic, ulcerative, hemorrhagic, phlegmonous, herpetic, fistulous, hemorrhoids, rectal abscesses, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already discussed these illnesses and their kinds, the signs of them, and their treatments in detail.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And what I say in this treatise about abscesses that occur in the belly when they are among those that can be cured, and if you want to know how the operation is performed.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and if there is redness and sensitivity in that area, do not perform an incision then, but treat it to aid maturation until the acuity of the symptoms subsides.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And now you should have the woman lie on a bench with two legs; let her recline on her back and place her feet at the part below the abdomen, and spread out her arms below her elbows, and bind them with bandages as is appropriate.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Follow the midwife with the right hand and administer the instrument with which to open the largest opening, the form of which will be made clear in the cases that will follow.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this instrument, place it along the axis of the largest part of the woman's body, and ensure that what enters from the instrument into the largest opening does not exceed the size of the largest part and lead to injury.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the opening of the largest part, then at that time you should apply poultices to the tissue around the largest opening so that it becomes impossible to introduce any instrument into the largest opening.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And you should place the spiral that runs along the handle of the instrument above your hand, and have the minister hold the instrument while rotating the spiral so that it opens the largest opening.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the wound appears and is touched by the hand and feels hot and moist, then at that time you should dry it with a piece of linen.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated, then you should place on the wound a piece of cloth submerged in olive oil or green oil, which has some astringent properties; and apply a bandage around the largest opening.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place clean wool over the largest opening and on top of it, place linen soaked in water in which mallows have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And it should be treated for about two days with the remedy that you consider appropriate until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And in some cases, the largest opening and the wound should be washed with this so that it is cleansed with water and honey, and then with water in which rue or long-leaved artemisia has been boiled, and afterward return to the remedy.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is inside the large cavity, then you must be prohibited from treating it with iron, but take care of that limb as we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To instruct midwives on how to treat male embryos in cases where there is an unnatural swelling as shown in the figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of normal childbirth by its signs. And it is when you see the woman push down and desire to smell the air, and she is encouraged by what is above her during labor; then you know that this birth is according to a natural figure, and the delivery is over the head of the child, and the second part is either suspended or hanging from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	When you see those signs, then it is necessary to compress the abdomen so that the embryo descends gently, for when it delivers over its head, the second part will be delivered, and it should be cleaned of those superfluities with proper cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But if it is another kind of delivery, it is unnatural and not commendable, for when the embryo is delivered on its back and the body of the child is delivered in front of its head and behind its feet, with one hand or foot exposed first, or the head and a hand or foot turned to the side, or the belly facing forward, and easily turns around its neck, resembling the figures of those that are not commendable.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these matters and to guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	Here is the translation:
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus is set upon the woman's head naturally, and it is strongly positioned on the woman and the birth is difficult in that place, and sometimes the strength of the womb has been weakened, then at this time one should cause her to expel it or allow her to have it, and evaporate the essence of fenugreek juice with warm oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the midwife's hand between those parts called the buttocks, and separate with the second finger, or dry it with her fingernail so that she can feel what is inside in terms of humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly so that the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not descend, then at this time the woman should be anointed with powder of cyperus and powder of fenugreek with eggs.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command her, after the anointment, to be made to sneeze with appropriate conditions; and do this at her mouth and nose for one hour, because the fetus will be expelled shortly.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both sides of the fetus are expelled at the beginning, then it is necessary to reduce them to ease gradually.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if it does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a cushion and raise her legs up, and then strike the cushion on the ground; and hold the woman so that she does not fall due to the impact.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the membranes are not returned and the fetus dies, then incise them and extract the remnants of the fetus or tie the body to your hand with a cloth and extract it gently, as it will be expelled.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of the incision of the embryo upon its sides.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is cut on its sides, then you should push them up, and immediately turn the fetus slightly, and then even it out, and then take a piece of it and extend them little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when it is cut into the contents, then you command him to sneeze, and make that person sneeze under certain conditions, for it will be expelled if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not expelled with what we have recommended, then you return the fetus little by little until you place it in its second natural position, for it will be expelled at that time with a simple incision.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prevented by everything we have recommended, then take musellage of hartshorn and dissolved gum, and triturate all in the mortar with good pounding, and then apply that mixture to the woman's cervix, at the bottom of her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that person sit in warm water, until the hypochondria are reached.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the lower parts of him are cleansed, then perform the fumigation of myrtle and apply that to him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the sub-fumigation has been performed for one hour, then make him sit on a chair, and then make that person sneeze and expel the mouth of him, and take him away, and press the lower part of his abdomen gently, for the fetus will be expelled soon.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Incision of the fetus on its sides and its thighs.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus is discharged in this form, then you devise to insert its smaller parts gradually; and let the woman be placed lying on her back, and place her legs raised up, and those [the midwife or surgeon] should sit beside her, and complete its members.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press gently on the belly of the child little by little, and then extract what is behind the thighs to just before the part that is near the buttocks.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus does not come out, then take hold of its legs and move them with force, and then press gently on what is above the hypochondria little by little until the fetus can reach the upper parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert its parts and engage the fetus little by little, and command the woman to exert herself until the fetus is completely delivered.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	 Deliver the fetus laterally with one of its parts.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	 Attempt to reduce the hand of the fetus, but if you cannot reduce it, then elevate the woman and allow that to pass.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if it cannot pass, then make her lie on her side, and strike the parts of the fetus with vigorous percussion, and then administer liniments which I use and recommend for soothing.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the childbirth has begun, then make her sit on a chair, and then study the reduction of the hand, and engage the fetus according to its natural position, and make the woman sneeze and command it [the fetus] to exert itself until it is completely delivered.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	 Deliver the fetus over the back with its parts and the fetal membrane at the side of its larger part.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Let the midwife hold the fetus and gradually turn it little by little, and let that part be facilitated.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is and how long it is soaked, then pause on the cooling of what we have recommended of oil and mucilage.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command him to squeeze it little by little, and when you have done this, now place that poultice on a cloth and command him to lean over the right side, and then command him to be restrained; and make him sneeze under certain conditions.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The exit of the prepared fetus on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you begin the incision of the mother according to this method, consider it, and then you make the second cut with your fingernail so that it is evacuated of the humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of the mother, then you make an incision at the abdomen, so that it is not restrained and dies.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then push the fetus towards the internal parts until you pause at the second necessary point, and tell the woman to restrain herself for several times, and the issue will be expelled quickly if God so wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins usually are born in separate births, but sometimes three or four may be born at once, though this is rare and uncommon; however, in some cases it is due to causes outside of nature, and not living.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And with these, whether they are multiple, make a second incision, and separate them by the cord, distinguish each one through the ligament at the navel of each. Sometimes they are expelled as one fetus would be in a natural quick manner, but sometimes they are expelled separately in an uncommendable way as we have mentioned.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if any of them are difficult for the woman in childbirth and you come to those which we have said about the unnatural figures, then treat them as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does what she should with ease and skill, and with delay when necessary, and acts according to every figure as it is prepared by the birth-giver for health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	A remembrance of what is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarriages.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes formations occur in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and sometimes more than ten, and you should now be convinced that a woman may miscarry at six months, and another at all formations, which cause was made by measurement of the glorious wise ones.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this must be known by the midwife because it is easy to mistake one thing for another, and therefore she should know what needs to be done.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus as we have said in the division of treatment and it is not successful, and you are forced to use surgery, then it is necessary for you to consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and is not subject to any of those accidents by which danger to her is feared.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Now it is necessary for the woman to be placed on her back on the bed with her buttocks raised and her head slightly lowered.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister should use a knife with two edges or tie it down firmly on the table so that the body does not move during the extraction.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then moisten the mother's mouth with olive oil and honey, as well as mallow, fenugreek, and linseed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mallows, and then inserts it gently into the mother, and then searches with her hand for the location of the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And in these cases: then you consider whether the fetus is positioned to descend head first, and if so, place the hooks in its hands, or around its neck, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or under its chin, or at its clavicle, or near the ribs, or under the armpits.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the descent is foot first, then place the hooks in the heels, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is necessary to hold the hook with the right hand, and place the curvature of it where the fingers of the left hand are, and insert the hand gently into the mother and place the hook in one of those places we have mentioned, until it reaches the obstruction.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then hold and place another hook in position, or a third if necessary, so that there is an equal pull, and not just extension according to its straightness alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And it should be moistened at all times, so that the extraction of it is eased just as it is done during the removal of a tooth.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	Place in the liquid that is between them so that the extension may be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then place that the midwife anoints some of her said hands with oil and interposes those skillfully and rolls back what is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	If the part of the fetus is presented incorrectly, then place the hooks between the places where it is more appropriate; and do this so that all of the fetus may be properly delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if one hand is presented before the other, and it is not possible to reduce that one by compression of it, then place a cloth wrapped around that one; and immediately extract that one so that all of it may be delivered, and incise it either at the joint of the hand or at the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do the same with the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large, or compression occurs during its presentation, or it is in the tight fitting part of the water, then place between the said protruding spines and cut open the head to extract the water, or use an instrument called “alundat,” the form of which will be among the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly do if the fetus has a large head by nature: then it is necessary to incise that with some instrument, or take that as we have said using an alundat; and immediately extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is presented and is compressed behind the clavicle, then it should be cut open so that the moisture which is in the cheeks may be effused.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it is not complicated and you do not wait too long, then cut into the head as soon as it is convenient for you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the flanks of the abdomen are full of pus or are in a state of hydrops, then it is necessary for you to puncture that part which runs with the moisture that is there.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the fault is on the lesser vessels, then the attraction of it is weak and the direction of it towards the mouth of the artery is weak.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is constricted in the abdomen and the thighs, then you must remove that piece of cloth with which you have wrapped around your hand, and cut into the abdomen and the thighs where the fluid runs.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members are stiff and turn the head, then insert your left hand; but if the mouth of the artery is open, then insert your hand into the chest, and search for the head, and pull it along with those mentioned to the mouth of the artery, and then insert about one or two inches, and pull it along with them.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the artery is constricted by pus that has occurred due to illness, then it must not be compressed upon it; instead, you should administer an effusion of moist and fatty substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply plasters; and follow with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fault is on the side vessel, then if possible, it should be punctured; and what we have said about the living condition should be administered.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if it cannot be done thus, then cut it into pieces and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And do not leave any cause for the second [operation].
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed the entire operation, now administer what we have said about the treatment after abscesses, of which there has been mention regarding the major ones.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs, then apply styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman in whose womb was a dead fetus, and next to it she was pregnant again, and beside the dead fetus another conception had taken place.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to one who had an abscess in the navel area for a long time; it became swollen inside with a pus-filled focus, and began to discharge pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to treat him, and treated him for a long time, but the condition did not improve.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I decided to apply some causes of strong attraction to him and extracted one bone from him, and after a few days, another bone was passed; and I was very surprised, as there were no bones in the abdomen.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I realized that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I examined the condition thoroughly and extracted several bones from her, which were located in various parts of her body. And in this manner over a long period, she expelled a small amount of pus.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	This is not to be considered strange, but because in this there is science and assistance for what the surgeon does with his hand in administering treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of a spiral used by the mother:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a clamp with which the leaves are held equally, at the clamping point there are two spirals at the ends of two arms.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this spiral should be finer than the string, and it should be made of reed or wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each arm should be two fingers, and the margin on each side should be one finger, and the length of each should be a palm and a half; and in the middle between the two arms there are two adjustments made from the same material as the arms, which are already fixed, their length being about half a palm more or less, and the width of each is two fingers, or slightly more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two attachments should be inserted into the mother's mouth so that they are held when you turn the two prescribed spirals.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another similar form, finer and more slender:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It should be made of reed or wood, resembling the form of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the end of each of these two attachments, as you see, the length of those attachments is one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open one of them, then at that time you should cut the woman on her bed with her knees raised, exposing what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument as you would with scissors, equally according to the quantity that you want of the width of the mouth of the wound until the speculum does what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The method of turning, which the ancients called:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Method of pushing with which the action is pushed forward:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Method of association with which the head is contained:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps, at the ends of which there are teeth, as you see. And sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as you see, with teeth like those of a reed, with which it is incised and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Method of association for few:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a hook having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a hook having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Method of forceps with which the teeth close to contain the head of the fetus:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a speculum having two ends with which the head is engaged:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two broad specula:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when more varieties of them are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, it is easier for their operation and better for people according to their needs.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	You should prepare those instruments which are necessary, for the need of them cannot be avoided.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of the extraction of the second [tooth].
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the afterbirth is retained after childbirth, you should instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then cause her to sneeze by certain means. Place your hand over the mouth and nose of the patient, and if this causes it to come out, that is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if that does not work, take a cloth and pierce it with a hole, placing it over the mouth of the mother along with herbs such as wormwood, rue, chamomile, Arabian saffron, cinnamon, and sage.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them should be immersed in water in the cloth, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a reed tube in the mouth of the mother, and hold it there until the vapor reaches the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then cause her to sneeze as we have said, and the afterbirth will be expelled quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this treatment delays and it does not come out, then you command the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or masticate almonds, and then insert that into the womb and gently pull out the afterbirth with it. If it is attached to the placenta of the mother, then insert her right hand as we have recommended, and when she has found the afterbirth, gently extract it little by little so that the mother does not fall due to violent traction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Take care that it is turned to the right and left with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And it should be adjusted in the amount of attraction, for it will obey and avoid adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed, we have already recommended treatment through sneezing and medication of the wound with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not expelled by all the causes we have recommended, then do not exhaust yourself in repeated attempts of abstraction. Instead, ensure that what has been ejected from the mouth of the mother lies close to the woman's body, and subsequently treat it with abortion and tetrapharmacon; for this will cause it to be purged after a few days and thus dissolved and expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it is purged, it rises to the head and to the stomach, causing illness; then it is necessary that sublimations and appropriate remedies be administered for this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients already used sublimation of nitre and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of the instrument with which a woman is subjected to sublimation due to the retention of menstruation and the second condition:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of wood or ivory.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the fine end should be placed in the vagina and the wider end above the fire, and the sublimation should be placed on the embers of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep that instrument inside until the sublimation is consumed, then repeat with another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of the treatment of the child's uncircumcised penis.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many children are born and their penises are not circumcised, which must then be carefully opened and covered.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then it should be the midwife who pierces with her finger that foreskin; and if not, pierce it with a sharp scalpel, being careful not to cut the glans.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then apply a poultice made of lint soaked in wine and oil; and afterwards, treat it with a dressing until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it is obstructed, then insert a cannula for several days, and remove it when the child needs to urinate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if there is an obstruction of the penis due to the hardening of a wound or abscess; then it should be that this hardening be incised, and afterwards it should be treated as we have said regarding treatment and lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of the treatment of fistulas that occur below.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that occur in the lower region close to the body or near the buttocks or in the area between them are usually hard and thick.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is one fistula or multiple.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And as this hardness subsides and it discharges watery or slightly purulent white moisture, and sometimes these fistulas penetrate deeper.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And these penetrating ones are known by what is emitted from them through discharge and swelling; and sometimes the severity of the discharge indicates that they are very deep.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	Of those fistulas, some extend into the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the shaft of the penis; and some penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the root of the bone.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in the one where it is known as a penetrating fistula into the anus and a non-penetrating fistula, you should insert your finger into the anus, and insert a fine probe of hair or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is tortuosity in that one, then insert the fine probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair with your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel anything of that and there is no process from the tract of any cause of evacuation or worms or gas, as we have said, then you know it is non-penetrating, and then proceed with the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the shaft of the penis, then the significance of that is that urine will come from there, and it prohibits this so that the place may be consolidated by medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circumference, then the sign of that is that the probe goes through there if there is no tortuosity within the bone, and causes pain in the circumference of the affected area; and you will have a persistent discharge from there; and that does not respond to medication, nor is it consolidated without treatment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the treatment for these is the labor and persistence of skilled physicians, upon which depends their success.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing by iron is hoped for as I will tell you, and this that I say is good.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient should lie between your thighs with their back upwards and lift the flanks up, so that the contents are inclined towards the abdomen, and then insert a probe of lead or iron if there is tortuosity in the fistula, until you know where the probe passes.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the pain is around the anus, then you should insert your finger into the anus at that time.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel with your finger that the probe can easily penetrate, or what you feel between your finger and that sinus or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that one, for there is no healing in that one, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some might say that it heals in some men slowly.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the treatment by which healing is hoped for involves you igniting a cautery subtly according to the size of the fistula, as has been described, and inserting that heated instrument into the fistula until it goes around the anus; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those inflamed tissues surrounding the fistula are tightened, so that they resemble the quill of a bird.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then treat that with bandages wrapped in boiled cloth until all those tightened tissues grow and consolidate, and then treat it with medicines that promote tissue growth and consolidation. If it heals, good; but if not, then it will not heal at any time by other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters and does not penetrate inside; you say which is in the anus, and between that and the probe there is a thin layer of flesh or tissue, and sometimes the fistula is on what appears as the surface of the buttocks. Now dry the area from the beginning of the fistula, and you see drying around the probe, and it should reach to the place where the tip of the probe reaches, and through the probe it is freed and cured.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those fistulated tissues that resemble the hollow part of a bird's feather quill and do not tear any part of them for any reason.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if blood flows when you are operating on those tissues, then the moment it happens during your procedure, immediately use a light instrument to cauterize with fire or with sharp medicine, because cauterizing with fire adjusts two good habits: one is the adjustment of those constricted tissues, and the other is the cessation of bleeding by removing excess moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then treat that with bandages wrapped in boiled cloth or soft lint until the area gets better, and afterwards cure the wound with hard flesh-producing remedies that generate and consolidate tissue.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And medicines that have astringent and drying properties; when they are restored, it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula already penetrates inside the rectum and is long from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And so if you feel the probe and between it and your finger there is only a thin layer of tissue or flesh, and it is close to penetration, then at that moment there should be no operation but rather proceed with caution based on trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to manage it in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry it until you achieve the condition where it becomes possible for you to introduce certain instruments and proper treatment; and do not proceed with drying if you risk damaging the muscle containing the bowel, and ensure that you act upon this diseased part similarly to the procedure without the patient's voluntary movement; and then cure that wound as we have said because it will be easier to heal; or extend that membrane and clean that pus which you dried inside near the anus, as we have said, either by hand or another sharp instrument, and then purify those ulcerated tissues where such drying can occur due to perforation; and then strive to restore the entire wound through drying, and if the upper pus opening is not consolidated, and remains the fistula open in the part of the anus, it will be lighter for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you introduce the probe into the fistula, and it is around the crack of the anus on the surface of the body at the seam and along the edge of the anus, take a probe with a perforated tip, which resembles a needle used to prepare the cores according to this method:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert it into that fine wrapping of five threads or around them; and then introduce the probe with honey into the fistula until you achieve the condition where it becomes possible for you to proceed.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates along the edge of the anus towards the inside, then you extract the honey from that tract as though you insert your finger into the anus; and pull out the tip of the honey and tie both ends tightly, and leave this for one day or two, and when you incise the honey in the flesh, bind it well so that those tissues are separated where they lie between the two ends of the honey and adhere.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Concerning the treatment of an internal injury, until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the openings of the fistula are not penetrating, now make them penetrate, in whatever way you have prepared it, but do not move it from its place, because it is not for you to do this so as not to injure the rectum; and then proceed with that until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the sharp-spined spatum with which the fistula is incised: its curvature should be acute on one side and not acute on the other, so that you do not injure what is unnecessary, as sometimes happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Regarding the suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows during the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids occur in two ways: either they appear around the anus like coal lumps, or they are soft and resemble grape clusters.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And they can be small and large, and the blood flows from them constantly and is one type, and multiple, and some are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are outside the anus are due to little moisture, from which yellowish water or a little blood flows continuously, and their color is like that of the skin.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit in such a way that the anus relaxes and the hemorrhoids become visible to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you cover yourself and suspend with hooks or what you have those with your fingernail, and then cut them along their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the hooks do not hold in them because of their moisture and softness, then take some rough cloth or a cork or a flaxen pad, and extract them with these mentioned tools, and afterwards incise around them and sprinkle on them certain powders near the incision, so that they serve as cauterization; or cauterize them as is described in the chapter about cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And afterwards treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the pus does not flow out, then incise the abscess with an incision that is small and wash it with the water in which it flows out easily when the abscess is squeezed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is easy to treat, and you should take them with your finger or hook, and incise them, and afterwards treat them as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for those who require suturing, proceed as follows: take silk wrapped around a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids at the top part, and make it penetrate with the needle on the other side of the incision, and wrap both ends of the thread underneath the part below the needle, and tie them horizontally; tighten the hemorrhoid firmly with the structure, and then knot the silk and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this for all of them, and leave one of them open and do not sew it up, so that the excess blood can flow out from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place on the wound a cloth soaked in rose oil or in cerate; and place that on the wound and instruct the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then place that inside the cavity; and when it is closed, treat those with applications or other treatment until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Often they occur due to the splitting of a fissure or constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they are old and do not respond to that medicine, you should then scrape those areas with the edge of a spatula or your fingernail until they are made wet and remove the pus from them, which prevents their consolidation; and then treat those areas until they are healed.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Now you should remove those areas by scraping the pus more vigorously until fresh blood appears and they are excoriated; and then treat those areas until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids, which is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that alamermar, which is crucial, and it appears as small round spots similar in color to the body but resembling the head of a nail, and they occur throughout the body but mainly below the waist and around them, and from these pains you should treat the patient.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it is necessary to incise what is in the vicinity of the spot, and hold it with forceps or a clamp, and remove it from its root; and then treat that area.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the surrounding area as described in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Of warts, it is a small raised rough fistulated round growth on the surface of the body, and they appear in most children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The treatment for it is to cut and spread that part open, or to remove it with a knife or scissors.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize that area, as we have said, with fire or with caustic medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And both inverted and non-inverted ones should be removed with the instrument which I shall describe.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Of ant bite marks, they are small raised or thick fistulated growths on the surface of the body often appearing around the genitals, and when touched, they feel like an ant bite, and they spread around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The treatment for it is to take a strong needle or a sharp pin and place it on the ant bite within the circle of the needle; then rotate your hand with the needle so that you cut out what is around the ant bite, and place it in the flesh around the area, so that you eradicate the ant bite from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a needle of iron or steel in this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the tip of the needle be sharp and subtle, blunt at the back (which means not perforated), wrapped in such a way that when held by the finger it is comfortable and can rotate easily.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize the ant bite, do so as described earlier in the chapter on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of the shape of the instruments which are administered to castrate.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes castrations are performed with instruments made of silver or lead or melted and hammered metal; and sometimes they are made of those small or large instruments according to whom they are administered, for the one who is treated in the cure of young children should be small; and for those whose testicles are soft or painful, their castrating instruments should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of the large and few castration instrument:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the cannula above, in which the bag is tied, should be wide according to this manner; and it should be at a distance where the bag is tied just as you see.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end below, which is inserted into the body, should be blunt (that is, not open) like a lion's tail, with subtlety; and on one side of it there are two grooves, and on the other side one groove, and the width of the groove should be according to the thickness of the rods, slightly thicker.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines are placed should be made of animal bladder or sheep's wool, and the length of the bag should be one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be perforated with threads as it is twisted; and the space between the threads should be as thick as a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those threads strong vinegar from raw vinegar, which should be of these vinegars or around them; and tightly attach the bag to it; and when the bag is placed on it, it should be tight at the head of the instrument between two distinct tight bindings, and then castrate each thread with it: But the quality of castrating with it is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity the patient can tolerate; and be careful not to make it too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Let the patient lie on their back, and raise her buttocks with something underneath like a cushion or a cloth; then anoint the tip of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or something similar; then gently insert it into the rectum until it is comfortable; then the assistant takes the syringe and squeezes it vigorously inside so that everything in the womb is evacuated through the tube; then remove the syringe and the patient lowers her buttocks to the side.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine causes her to sweat, let her do so as much as possible; and if she sleeps with it throughout the night, it is better for her recovery.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you treat her for abdominal disorders and sweating with the cautery, then continue using the cautery until she is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the rectum, then use a very fine and soft womb purge, similar to those used for children.
De curacio de las plaguas.	On the treatment of plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already mentioned in the section on the treatment of plagues what is suitable for the book, and I will now describe the treatment of those with plague using medicines according to the regimen.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that plagues are diverse depending on what causes the plagues and depending on the location where the plague occurs.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for various types of plagues are as follows: like a stone thrown, or a cut by a sword or knife, or a blow with a lance, or a stick, or an arrow, or similar to those from various causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Here are the plagues that are in the parts of the body such as the plague which affects the head, the neck, the feet, the belly, the groin, and similar ones to those affecting the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I also recommend the treatment of certain plagues, so that you pause that reasoning and rule regarding other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple plagues of the head, for the recall of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, I say that when you encounter a simple plague in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to an impact of a stone or similar object and has merely bruised the bone but is significant enough for you to fear that an abscess might form, at this time, you should immediately apply leeches or perform phlebotomy on the cephalic veins without delay; do not postpone this if there is no prohibition against phlebotomy based on some other cause, especially if little blood flows from the wound of the plague.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And the phlebotomy should be performed on the opposite side of the affected area; and ensure that the patient is guarded against overeating and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some cause prohibits phlebotomy in detail, then reduce the patient's food intake and do not allow meat or strong foods.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause treatment on the plague if an abscess forms, and then apply it only in rose oil or in wine that has been stypticized.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if you are sure of an abscess forming, then pause treatment on the plague if it is recent and the patient's blood and air have not changed; in that case, apply the powder I recommend sparingly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, then pause for some time until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	And if the wound is large or due to a division of tissue and similar cases, and if it cannot be closed with stitches using needles, then close those with sutures as I will explain regarding the suture of them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	And if the wound is already exposed to the bone and sinew, and it is not a retention but only a small suspender, then incise that and immediately treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in place of stitching, and order the patient to abstain from foods that are harmful: meat, fish, and similar things, until he is well.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find that the stitch has become putrid and does not adhere to the bone, then incise all of that rotten part and remove it, and immediately treat it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	And if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding may occur, and it cannot be stopped with medicines, then press on the artery. If you find that it has not been cut, then cut it with a scalpel or ligate it; and if necessity compels you and what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize until the bleeding is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is minor. Therefore, you can powder those with this powder, for it will consolidate them before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of the powder is as follows: take oil of almonds one part, dragon's blood two parts, and burnt frankincense three parts; mix all this well and sift it, then fill the wound with it, and compress it tightly so that it adheres properly to the wound, and let it coagulate with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	From the band above, take the poultices and leave that one, and do not loosen it while it is still such that it has not become an abscess, for medicine does not reach it to heal until it becomes healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes use this single cautery when it is not at hand the juice and saliva of a dragon.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And perform this method of operation on large wounds when it is necessary to place them flat and make them narrow, and for fresh wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially when it is in summer time, then do not apply this powder immediately, but instead treat these with what we have said, placing upon them some cold applications or placing upon them flour of barley mixed with water and honey until they begin to rot; and then cure these with the other treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if you encounter a wound with a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you extract that with forceps.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will describe the treatment of fractures of the head in what follows.
De las plaguas del col.	Of wounds to the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and between a simple wound of the head, it is the same.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve of the neck is severed or an artery is cut, then if it is a nerve, there is no remedy except to avoid treatment with anything that strongly constricts, such as zinc ore and similar substances that injure the nerves and contract them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	Do not pause on any cause of pain, for the substance of the nerves is connected and continues to the brain, which is the source of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if he is to be treated with gentle medicines, such as being washed with warm water, sometimes immersed in rose oil or non-rose oil, and then dried when washed with warm water, and the other stones are applied according to this method, and moisture is found.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is severe, then administer stitches, or close its edges, and subsequently treat it with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound is deep or affects the lowest part of the flesh, then pierce it at the deepest location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if an artery is already cut in the wound and bleeding occurs, then tie off or cauterize it, or ligate it if necessity requires such action.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the neck or entire spine have already been cut, and only the veins of the neck remain intact, then you should close the edges of the wound with sutures over the bone of the neck without touching it; instead, equalize and reduce it to its natural position, and subsequently strengthen it with proper support, and leave it for several days; afterward, treat it with powders that have astringent and stimulating properties until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has already penetrated into the bone, then probe it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all that you can; and what you cannot reach, leave it until the wound pusifies, and once it separates, reduce its swelling.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle over it the powder which has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if a fistula has formed in the wound, now treat it with the liquid whose description will come shortly in its proper chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of wounds to the neck or similar ones that are made between the shoulders, whether by a spear, knife, sword, or similar weapon.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a thrust wound from a spear or knife, and you feel the depth of it, now consider whether there is air bubbling when the injured person urinates; then you will know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth to it and the wound is fresh with its own blood, now apply powder during the first hour, and do not press it so that the blood does not remain trapped in the depths of the wound and return to the heart to infect the patient, but instead use a drawing agent applied twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the drawing agent is not available to you, now apply a piece of cloth over the wound opening so that it absorbs any moisture; and have the patient lie on the wound so that the liquid within can drain out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed since the wound was inflicted and no spasms, heart palpitations, or abdominal cramping occur, and other good signs are present, then you will know that the wound is safe; and then treat it with dressings and proper care until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if healing of the wound is delayed and much time has passed, then you will know that a fistula has formed; treat it therefore according to its proper chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is from a spear or a knife, and it is simple on the surface of the skin or flesh, then treat it as you would with stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if it has already penetrated to the bone and some of what was severed is still inside, then you should turn the wound and try to extract those pieces, if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separate, then leave them inside until the wound heals, because their removal would be easier.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other wounds in the other limbs, the treatment in healing is similar to what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	For wounds of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The condition that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, slight, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	In severe cases, you may find the bowel or a nerve of the bowel affected, because there is more serious intrusion and the stitching must be more forceful and delicate.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A small disruption is difficult to manage by other methods, and it should be noted that reducing them is more difficult if you do not return them to their proper place immediately, because they swell and become enlarged, making the instrument for doing so difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore, the best disruption is moderate, because in that case it is not difficult to reduce the bowel, unlike in the two previously mentioned types where it is difficult.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you should know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two types of sutures are common and suitable for suturing other wounds on the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	Of two other sutures proper communicate with other wounds, but however more in the suture of the abdomen. 
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	Here is the translation:
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Thus I say that when the swelling is small and some cause has constricted the bowel by it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then there are two ways: either because of the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when inflammation has come upon the bowel due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when it is thus, then what you should do is to warm that area in this way: take a sponge or cloth soaked only in lukewarm water, or steeped in hot water with cyperus and spica, and apply it to the bowel until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes it is done with something that has styptic properties, and it is better than water alone for resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore when you see the inflammation resolved, then you moisten the bowel with water in which sage and mallows have been steeped, for by this it is alleviated somewhat from pain.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the pain persists near this treatment, then you should divide the rupture slightly with an instrument with which hemorrhoids are incised.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better, when it is appropriate and does not require cutting, and there is no need to dry it out due to necessity and deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, this is its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of it is sharp-edged, and the other part is not sharp, and the tip is fine, but not as fine as a spatula; rather, it should be somewhat blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And thus when the ulcer is enlarged and it has come out of the abdomen, now it must be that its reduction is according to the form of nature, in its proper place, if possible over this, for better is.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is wide and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, now you must make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs further apart than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you place the patient's head and feet further apart than the parts below.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two sides of the abdomen, now direct your attention and consideration entirely so that the part in which the ulcer is shall be further apart than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And so you must administer this for large ulcers and for medium-sized ulcers as well.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And for small ulcers, prepare what is necessary, and then have the most skilled person among you perform the treatment, who should hold the wound entirely with their hand and adjust the lips of it, and then proceed to suture it appropriately.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or a piece of material that can serve as a needle according to the quantity and amplitude of the ulcer; then hold from the extremity of the disruption with your ring finger, and pull the needle taut so that you do not place stitches at both ends of the edge but rather between the edges of the inner parts, until you make it penetrate through one part; and when you have joined both ends of the edge and both ends of the inner parts together, this makes four stitches.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	About an inch above the wound on both sides, make two incisions parallel to each other. Then bring together the two edges of the wound and close it properly; then place your finger over this area and insert another needle there, and similarly fasten this with wax as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if necessary with needles until you have completed the entire closure of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of medium fineness between coarseness and subtlety, for fine needles pierce the flesh quickly; but thick ones are difficult to insert into the tissue, and therefore it is best that they be of medium fineness and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not advisable to place the needle at both extremes of the wound in a straight line, as this may cause the flesh to be pierced too quickly and the wound to separate before it has properly healed.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not extend the stitches too much so that the wound is not hindered from healing properly.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not cause irritation to the patient while sleeping; and place over the sutures small padded cushions from all sides, which should cover the ends of the needles; and leave them in place until you know that the wound has healed properly.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And this type of suture with needles is most convenient for small wounds, as you only need one or two needles or around that number.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second type of suture is common: it involves suturing all four corners, two from the wound and two from the circumference, at once, with a needle that has been properly waxed in terms of fineness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	When you have pierced these four extremities with the needle, reduce the needle from that part where you began, so that the thread may draw the pus to the most sovereign part of the wound, so that the suture may be a cloth stitch on which the cloths are strongly pulled.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the smallest finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known to people.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And in such a suture, I sewed the wound of a man who was injured in his abdomen by a knife, and the disruption of the wound was larger than one palm, and it had split from the intestines around two palms from the mid-intestine, and the disruption was at the midpoint of the body part; then I reduced that after the intestine had been out of the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was healed within the space of fifteen days or so, and he was treated and became well; and shortly thereafter he spoke with words, and returned to his normal state.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by miracle fire, for I did not treat him with any medicine, as I was in a place where no medicines were available, but placed linen soaked twice daily on the wound and washed it frequently with honey water until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will describe two kinds of suture according to the narration of the Word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin the suture from the outer part and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so when the needle penetrates into the bone and in that place cuts according to straightness and length of the entire body, and leaves the extremity of the suture in which you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate at the other extremity the needle from the inside part to the outside part at the other extremity of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that penetration, now make another penetration in that same extremity of the wound from the outside to the inside; and leave the extremity of the suture that is in this place, and make the needle penetrate at the other extremity from the inside part to the outside part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make that penetration such that when you penetrate it into the suture at the extremity of the wound, which is in the part inside so that all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin from this side and take it to the other side at the extremity that is of the suture, and extract the needle from the bone which penetrates, and then reduce that one into that bone and fix the extremity of the suture that is on the other side at this extremity of the wound; and extract that one from the bone which is on this side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this one time and then another, and do this one time after another until you sew up everything that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the purpose of this method of suturing is that you sew the membrane as if sewing skins together; thus, you sew the suture once from the side of the bone extremity, and leave it for another time until it is complete.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Here is the translation:
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Keep the needle at your disposal near the exit point, and insert it into the inner part through this opening, and leave both ends of the suture; then turn the needle and pass it from outside to inside at both ends of the suture.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then turn each stitch and pass them from the inner part to the outer part at both ends of another opening on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of stitching is better than the common simple suture, and it is the type of suture that I have described previously.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Walia.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And if someone asks you, the stitching of the abdomen is done with two needles, which means that you insert a thread into each needle and begin by inserting one needle into the opposite side according to the method used for sewing equal parts.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when a disruption occurs in the middle part of the abdomen, then the suturing there is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the judgment in the treatment of wounds is the same as for other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The reason for this is that when you manage a recent wound with its own blood before the air alters it, and you reduce the bleeding and clean it properly, then apply powder to it.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply some ingredients that you have at hand which help to form hard scabs and bind the threads; then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If the medicines are not present at hand, then pause for a short while, because it begins to gather pus and forms thick scabs, and change that twice daily, as you have been taught, until it is healed, so that you do not need another medication in various conditions when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the wound may communicate to the principal members, then cover it with linen soaked in high-quality oil or in rose oil, and place that around the area between the joints and let it remain there.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if pain or putrefaction occurs in the intestines, as this often happens, then administer astringent black terebinth twice, and especially if the corruption has reached the intestine and an abscess has formed penetrating into the cavity of it.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that what is of the thick intestine heals more slowly than what is in the thin intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because the intestine called “gegunu” does not easily recover from a wound that affects it completely; and this is due to the great number of veins within it, its large size, the subtlety of its structure, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what proceeds from the wound is tissue, and you obtain that fresh, reduce it according to your judgment in the same way as you reduce the intestines.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed to the space and is already green or black, then when you apply that with wax over the area that is discolored, so that blood flows out, because there are veins and arteries in the tissue.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then cut into this other bandage, and pause with both ends of the thread hanging from below the part of the wound, so that above it may be relieved the attraction of it; you must secure the placement of the cloth and emission of the pus from the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the wounds that occur in the bowel.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a disruption occurs in the bowel and is small, it is possible that it may be restored in some people; for this reason, I saw one who had been wounded in his abdomen by the thrust of a lance, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had become a fistula, with discharge from the injury and gas.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I proceeded with the treatment of it, although I was not confident in its healing, but I tried to make that part which had become inflamed healthy and to consolidate the area.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And when I saw the area already consolidated, I warned about the harm that might come from this bad event in his abdomen; and no one became harmed by this accident, but they remained cautious in their food consumption and drinking, and then bathed and exercised as directed.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced individuals say that when a small wound occurs in the bowel, it should be treated in this manner: take large-headed ants; then bring together the two edges of the wound and place one of those ants with its head open on both sides of the wound; when it grips onto them and tightens its mouth, cut off its head because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another ant next to the first one, and do not stop placing ants one after another according to the quantity of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then reduce that and bring the flap along with it; and let those small pieces remain attached in the cloth so that the cloth is sound; and do nothing to harm the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the cloth be sewn with fine thread made from the same animal as the cloth attached to it, since it is more needle-compatible; and take one end of this thread of cloth, let it be bare, then attach that end to the thread by sewing around it, and now insert that thread through the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of stitching with fine threads is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin cloths, now only fine stitching can be done, and not complete healing of it.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that every wound and abscess when it becomes old and chronic, and forms an ulcer that is not consolidated and continues to discharge over time without being excised, whether in any limb, is universally called a fistula, and we refer to this as an abscess.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And truly, a fistula is a felted nodulation, hard and white, at which there is no pain but rather a sensation like the itching of bird’s pinions; and for this reason it is called a bothersome itch, that is, an irritation.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in some people a moist fistula, which discharges fluid; and in some cases the moisture can be excised within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	In some cases, this humidity is moved, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said in the division, now when I discuss the ulcers, that every ulcer which has not healed and is not on bare flesh, is due to one of these causes: among which one is either because there is little healing power in the body; or because it is malicious; or because between it and the vessels there is hard flesh preventing the growth of new flesh; or because it moves slowly; or because that ulcer itself is putrid and the matter passing through it is of poor quality; or because the medicine used for its cure is inappropriate; or when corruption sets in, causing pestilence; or due to the property of the region as in Saragossa where treatment of diseases is difficult and healing of abscesses is delayed by nature; or because there is bone under it, or moving bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have already shown all those causes, the signs of them, and their cure with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is necessary for me to tell you about the treatment of fistulas, which is done through surgical operation.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; among them are those that extend to large veins and arteries, or to nerves, or to the brain, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the compound joints such as that of the hand and foot; and there are those that affect the vicinity of major limbs and similar areas.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore, among these fistulas that follow this method, they are diseases difficult to heal, and do not easily receive a cure, and dealing with them requires effort and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if any of the fistulas has a depth which does not reach to those places that were mentioned, and you hope for and trust in its cure, and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula goes along straight, explore it with this.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	And if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of thin lead, for the lightness of its body allows it to glide easily along the curvature.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has openings that are horrible to see, it is not within your power to signify upon them with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then irrigate the openings through those openings, for the moisture with which you irrigate that one will go to the other openings and flow from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire meticulously to determine if there is bone or nerve, and whether the depth of the fistula is distant or near. Also consider whether it is a fistula for which all its openings are evident at once within your full capacity, within your thorough investigation, with which you investigate the malady, and the cause of the pain under your compression on the spot, and similar signs and accidental causes related to the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have established all those causes with true judgment, then proceed to the treatment with confidence: and this is that you consider now whether it is a fistula that is apparent and close, or in a location near a joint, or nerve, artery, vein, or one of the places I have told you about.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Now you should treat the fistula as described in its narration, and remove what is within that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what has grown out from the opening of the flesh or tissue, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of great depth and follows a straight course, it becomes necessary to incise it as far inwards as you can, and then remove all the corrupted flesh; afterwards apply plasters wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have probed with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this several times so that the sharp medicine may dissolve all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then treat it with applications that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it does not heal from this treatment, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you need to determine this, then you should probe it and dry it as we have recommended, unless you prohibit any involvement with veins or nerves or a major limb as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and there is any corruption or blackness on it, then you should cut away that part until all the corruption is removed; and afterwards treat it with what promotes flesh growth until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it does not heal and pus continues to flow as before, then you will know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and then uncover it again and carefully examine and cleanse it with your strongest remedy, and afterwards treat it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it heals, that is good; but if not, then you will know that the corruption is deep within the body and has not been reached, and then in that case you should only dress the wound.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, it is possible for you to remove that one; then you remove it with subtle forceps which are suitable for that.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if many bones are affected, then carefully perform the extraction of all those, and do not leave any of them for any reason due to your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if any cause of the humidity opposes you, and in their incision there is neither fear nor hesitation, then incise those ligaments or muscles here, and liberate the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if it is not the right time for you to remove the bones at this moment, then apply something that can alleviate the condition on the affected area, and leave it as it is within the vicinity of those bones, and protect the area so that it does not become consolidated, and ensure that the section you have incised during your operation remains open.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having said that, if you are concerned, apply a poultice submerged in hot oil with thyme, or a poultice submerged in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments, because when these will soothe those ligaments and the bones are separated from their attachments, and this attraction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone such as the bone of a camel or cow or similar to those, and what is corrupted of it is only the surface, then scrape that off with resistance only from behind until that blackness and corruption is removed, and then restore the area.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if the part that is corrupted is large, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area and thoroughly incise within the location where the corruption has spread, and then treat it so that it becomes consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	Here is what is recommended to you concerning what may happen to a man in his condition so that you may use this as an example and assistance for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man by age around xxx years old, to whom pain occurs in his abdomen, and from the internal parts there is an evil condition regarding the matter inside the body that has reached the abdomen, and it is a large abscess, and it is not due to an extrinsic cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then time was wasted on that due to the error of the physicians until the abscess became pus-filled, and they intervened when matter had become disturbed, and his cure was delayed until an abscess had formed瘘管化脓后才进行治疗，而且他在多个排出脓液和身体湿气的开口处进行了手术。
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the patient was treated by many physicians for two years, and none of them had skill in the art until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the abscess and the matter that was flowing from those openings in large amounts; and already the body of that man was completely weakened, and his complexion was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the probe into one of those openings, and the probe reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I immediately examined all the openings and found that they reached around all parts of the abscess.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I decided to incise one of those openings so that I could expose a part of the bone, and I found it corrupted; it was already turned to dust and decayed. And a part of the abscess had penetrated into the marrow and was also corrupted.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I used what had been shown to me and prepared from the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I cut out not from the bone but that corruption which I had diagnosed and prepared to remove.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I paused the restoration of the wound with healing medicine for a long time, and it did not heal.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I repeated and exposed further upon the bone secondly over the initial exposure, and found continued corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I treated what appeared to be that corruption to me, and then I attempted to perform the cure and restoration, and it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I exposed another area and did not stop incising the bone little by little particularly to perform the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I incised around one palm's width of it, and that extract with its marrow, and then I restored that with medicines, and it healed quickly and was cured.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to repeat the operation and section of it except for the disposition of its fever and the lack of its tolerance and fear of death, because it was affected at all hours by excessive evacuation and fainting spells.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus he was fully healed, and nothing remained of bone but flesh; and his condition in his body improved, and his strength returned; and he recovered his abilities and did not experience contrary effects while walking or from any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if there is an elevated bone in place of the injured body part, then you should proceed as follows: take a thread and tie it at the end of that elevated bone, and instruct someone to extend that; pause with a thicker thread after the first one; then lay the thread on the skin near the bone, and stretch its extremity so that you pull the skin away from the sides, and thus expose the skin over the place where you want to cut so that the scissors do not injure the skin.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	Place a board or table under the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to saw through the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	You should saw over the slightly corrupted area little by little, because if there is corruption in the concavity of the bone that does not appear upon its surface, you may need to saw from the other side.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted but not prominent, and it is connected to another part, with the corruption in the middle or part of it, then you should expose the flesh from all sides; place a board underneath, and saw off the first part where the corruption is, while ensuring that the sawing continues from the other side.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And make the sawing according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw through the bone where it continues from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption extends between two joints, then it is not in the proper place but elsewhere.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the center of the hand or foot, it is more difficult; however, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you, and then incise that area, and treat it according to each possible disposition, making sure not to cut any vital vessels or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you must know which instruments and saws to use for these bones, as they vary according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, their fineness and size, their hardness and rarity; therefore, it is necessary that you prepare appropriate tools for each type of operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that the operation depends on the type of instrument which you need; when you are a great student and long experience in the methods of this art, and witness to the methods of diseases, then you will apply what is appropriate for the instruments to all diseases.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I shall form for you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will keep as simples, among which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experiment on others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw: 
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of a rod:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this rod be shaped like the head of a star-shaped key, and let its points be shaped like the points of an asterisk.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not sufficient unless the heads of the joints are rubbed with them when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is large and wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of a larger razor than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another saw properly made: let it be made with the back as strong as possible and the cutting edge of steel, and the handle made of wood like a dagger properly made.
Forma de lu:	Form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of a razor in which there is a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor with a curved tip:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small razor resembling a tentorium:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of a scalpel with which bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another smaller scalpel:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another scalpel; this resembles a rod, and the tip of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in suitable words in relation to the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Shape of the probe which is suitable for piercing through the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the tip of it is triangular and has a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian steel, and apparently it suits all the causes we have mentioned regarding knives, forceps, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Regarding the cutting of tips and the sawing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The tips may need to be removed either due to an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause; or when you have treated that corruption with the prescribed medicines and the treatment does not take effect, or sometimes the corruption spreads beyond a member without any apparent reason. At such times it is necessary for you to cut off that part where the corruption lies so that the patient may escape from death or severe illness, which would be a greater evil than the loss of that limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign that this affects someone is that the limb turns black as if burnt by fire, or the corruption approaches close to the blackness such that the putrefaction spreads within that member and throughout the body. Therefore, it is necessary for you to perform an amputation of that part.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if the corruption is caused by the bite or sting of certain venomous creatures such as a scorpion, viper, or rattlesnake and similar animals.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the bite is at the tip of a finger, then you should amputate the finger and not allow the corruption to spread into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if the corruption reaches the hand, then you should amputate at the joint of the wrist and not allow the corruption to spread further into the elbow joint.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you encounter that, then cut the arm at the joint in the collarbone.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption spreads around the collarbone area, then death is imminent for the patient; and each cause requires its own treatment in cure, which is a matter of the proper amount of efficacy.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	Similarly, when corruption reaches the toe, then you must cut it off at one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it affects the entire foot, then you must amputate the whole foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it penetrates to the toe, then you must cut off the foot at the joint of the toe.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread to the toe, then there is no remedy but dismissal, and let the patient die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of cutting off a limb or binding it is that you tie a ligature above the part where you wish to cut, and apply another ligature over the area; extend one ligature below the part, and have another extended above by an assistant; separate the skin that lies between the two ligatures with a spatula until all the flesh is exposed; then it can be cut or bound.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it is necessary to cover the area with a cloth from all sides so that it does not touch the affected site, and to ensure that the patient receives appropriate treatment for injuries and abscesses.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if bleeding occurs while you are working, then you must immediately cauterize the area, or apply some powders to staunch the blood; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it so that it may be healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you what happens to a man in his house, this kind of accident about which I advise you, which is one that often occurs due to exposure to intense heat similar to fire combustion.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first occurs inside his hand and then tends to spread throughout the entire body.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that person prepares himself for something worse than the treatment going to the limb due to the intensity of the pain and burning, and often amputates that hand at the joint, and the wound is healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Such corruption in the finger of the hand often persists for a long time.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then they came to me, and I prescribed them to eliminate that excess through the medicine I applied, along with the cleansing of their body; but the excess was not eliminated and began to spread to another finger starting from the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And they pleaded with me to amputate the hand, but I refused to do so, hoping for the elimination of that excess, and fearing that the amputation of the hand might lead to death, as the strength of the disease was very severe.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And after he left me, he returned to his home and later came back to me saying that he had prepared himself and amputated his entire hand, and was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have included this narrative only to assist in understanding the nature of this disease and to serve as an example for how it should be treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids and the quality of enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in any fleshy member and the space of the abscess extends inward forming a collection of pus, and it is then ruptured and perforated, and the pus is discharged from there, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin above it remains thin like cloth, and has not reached corruption behind, nor does it affect the bone or nerves or tendons, it is called a sinus, and is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space extends inward such that corruption affects some member, it is then called a fistula and not a sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for it is to incise that skin completely as it has formed, especially when it is thin like cloth, and ensure that you do not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	However, if you hope that the skin will adhere and that the corruption has not yet reached behind, and there is pus passing through the skin, then you should treat it with an enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And when you consider the sinus, if it is large and the arm with which you work has a fetid odor, then treat it with an Egyptian medicine consisting of oil, vinegar, and rose water in equal parts, and mix them in a vessel until the medicine becomes thick like honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take the amount that is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and administer it as an enema to the sinus, and plug the opening of it, and leave the medicine inside for the duration of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	From there extract that which is despised; and do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the pus is evacuated.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And on some occasions it is administered as an enema with water of ashes, when this medicine is not at your disposal; and take the ash of wheat, put it over the water; then filter that and administer it as an enema until you are convinced that the sinus is now closed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then administer it with water and honey mixed in small quantities three times, and administer it with vinegar and honey mixed, because the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and the vinegar makes the sinus adhere, especially when the vinegar has an excess of astringency and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this on some occasions and are convinced that the sinus is now cleared, then administer an enema with something that promotes flesh growth.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take of the herb dyafinicon and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent vinegar; or administer an enema with various medicines and other herbs that have the properties which I have already written about in the chapter on herbs.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow such that the enema tube cannot be received, then gradually enlarge it with a small instrument, and pause in this gentle treatment wrapped in Egyptian herb or basilicon until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly, if the orifice is too wide, then you should approximate the edges of it with sutures and leave it in a condition where the enema can be introduced without additional intervention.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifices of the one through which the arm flows are raised above the parts below, then dry up that in the pus base location which is where the arm flows underneath, for when the arm is compressed at the depth of the bend the flesh will be generated there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry up the sinus beneath the pus base as you wish, then proceed by preparing the limb according to the preparation which allows the arm to flow gently as it is appropriate for you and so that nothing impedes the movement of the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines to be applied over the sinus as is appropriate for what you wish to extend them over the cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such a great quantity as to cover the entire sinus; then, with scissors, carefully cut along the right of the sinus orifice an opening slightly larger than the sinus orifice; then extend over another piece of cloth the healing ointment according to the size of the opening, and place it above the large cloth at some distance from the sinus orifice so that the movement of the arm is not hindered by the large cloth but only after a few days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	But that which is over the sinus orifice, which you should change at all times so that it dries what is inside the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know whether what flows from the arm is much or little, or is digested, or is undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And with this, you should consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and whether it is an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is deposited on the orifice of the sinus has adhered or is about to adhere, then you loosen it on the third day, and when you loosen the poultice, then change the cloth and renew the application.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if in the sinus there is a space for a subtle pus to form, then do not despair of its adherence, because its healing will soon follow, because some people take longer to generate flesh in their poultices, and among them are those who experience the opposite.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if for many days a thick and undigested substance remains in the sinus, then you know that the sinus will not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and this causes it to be prolonged, then adjust the drying effect of the medicines. If the medicines are moist in their composition and in their power, dry them thoroughly like a definitive application when there is an excess of honey added to them.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the best way to treat it is to take a definitive application and dissolve it in rose oil, and place it over what you previously used with its substance still present, and confirm how that works for you and use it accordingly.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems in that action, when there is no thick substance, take a definitive application and honey which has been cooked until it is thickened, and use it; or take myrrh, aloes, and frankincense, mix them all together, powder them over the honey while it is on the fire, then apply this mixture to a cloth and strengthen it over the sinus; also line with that honey you have cooked until it has thickened, and powder over a cloth and apply it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And in some cases, it is administered with the aristolochia longa and roots of lily (and that is the celestial lily) and flour of wheat and centaury, and use those simples or mix them, crush them and sieve them and powder over the honey which is recommended; and use this.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged and is not healed by this treatment, then you will know that the corruption is in its root, and it has already infected the bones or other hard members or ligaments; now treat it with fistula treatment as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	On the treatment of paronychia and cracked nails and the cutting of an added finger joint and sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Paronychia is an abscess that arises from the nail of the toe or finger of the hand or foot, and it can also occur in other fingers. When it prolongs and its treatment is delayed, it becomes an abscess of a cauterized abscess or it corrupts, and exudes pus internally which corrodes the root of the nail, and quickly corrupts the entire nail, and often spreads to the bone inside causing a foul odor, and the extremity of the finger or toe becomes darkened.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have done what we have said in the division and do not see improvement in your treatment, then it is necessary that you incise with a knife all the excess that is swollen from the nail and immediately cauterize the wound, as immediate cauterization is helpful in such cases.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the addictions of the nail begin to push back into the flesh from the sides, causing pain and discomfort, then you should apply a fine paste below the angle of the nail that causes pain on the flesh, and push it up and incise that flesh with ease, and place over what remains of the flesh corrosive medicines until it is all removed; and then treat that with ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If corruption has already begun in the bone, then you must incise the bone and extract it, for it is never healed when the corrupted bone remains.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and corruption spread to the finger, then you must incise it at one of its joints as is prescribed in its treatment, and subsequently care for it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if there is a bruise or inflammation under the nail, and there is severe pain in that area, then at the beginning you should bleed the patient, and subsequently dry the nail with a sharp spatum in a transverse cut from top to bottom, but be careful that the cut does not penetrate into the flesh below the nail, for you would cause the patient great pain, and it would lead to the formation of excess tissue in the area; and thereafter treat that place with something that relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But the finger that is swollen, which occurs in many people, is mostly fleshy, and there is little bone in it, or it is little in the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or the swelling is in some of the joints of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is born in some of the joints of the finger is not so harmful, and that which is born at the joints is very harmful.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are fleshy swellings, the incision is slight, and you should cut it behind its base with a broad spatum.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But of that which is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, be careful not to amputate it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In that which is described about nuts, you should incise at the beginning the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then use one of those saws suitable for this, and then treat that within so that it may be healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	In the case of consolidation that occurs between certain guarded movements or due to the birth of a person who is born with it, or due to the healing of an illness or by burning from fire, then you should treat that consolidation until the said condition returns to its natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between the bandages soaked in rose oil so that they do not consolidate too quickly, and separate them, or place a thin sheet of lead between them until it is consolidated as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs in certain areas on the palm, then you should treat that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suitable for the shape of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Regarding incisions for veins, these are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins that are varicose, and veins wrapped thickly full of melancholic humors, which flow through the limbs of the body, and their primary occurrence is in the legs, particularly in the legs of travelers, workers, and those who carry loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then you should administer purgation of the body with black bile several times for strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment of them due to iron is according to two methods: one is that it should be incised and the black blood drawn out, and the other method is that the vein should be raised and completely extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section on this is as follows: Begin by filling a bag with warm water and place it so that the thick blood is dissolved, which is sediment in the bag. Then press the patient's body at the part most filled with pus below the bone using a cloth bandage, and then make an incision in one place or two, or three near the area, and then lift the black blood on the lower side of the bag upward into it, and above downward until the amount of blood is released that you want and as much as suffices, and which the patient's strength can tolerate.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then bind it with bandages and instruct him to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and inform the patient about this.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But the elevation of it is as follows: If you see that the patient's body has hair, then shave the area where the bag will be placed. Then place the patient in a bath or fill a bag with warm water so that the area reddens and the veins become prominent; or have the patient exercise vigorously if a bath is not available, until the limb becomes heated.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the area along the vein by making an incision either above near the bone or below near the foot.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then probe the area with hooks and strip the vein from all parts until it appears to the touch, and it should appear to you as it slopes toward darkness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And thus when you examine it, from the area take what appears to be white and cord-like.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And so you place the patient lying down with their head raised and propped up by pillows.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then cut another section near that one for three reasons, and then displace the wound above the vein that appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then raise that and incise it at the rear section behind the heel, and then extract that and raise it so that it exits through the second section, and then extract that from the section above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract that from the section that is highest or farthest from all the sections, until everything has exited; then at that point incise it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey to extract and raise it, then insert a strong double-threaded needle and tie it and extract it, or insert it below the skin and rotate your hand in all directions until it is expelled.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful not to cut it; for if it is broken, it becomes difficult to raise that piece and it will cause harm to the patient due to this injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when you have completely removed that piece, then place on the wound wool submerged in wine and rose oil and unrose oil, and treat it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vessel is contracted with tortuosities in its covering at those parts, and it is not straight as we have said, then you should cut along each part of the tortuosity and the places where it is covered, and then suspend it with needles until you raise it completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful in your sectioning that you do not cut the vein and that you do not compress it, for it will be difficult for you to raise it; and use your discretion in this.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Form of the incident by which the operation is performed:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of applying ointment:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It should not be as sharp as a knife nor have a pointed end so that it does not compress the vein; and it should be of thick flexibility, like a lion's tail, for if it were slender, it would cut the vein due to its slenderness; however, it should not be excessively thick as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of the extraction of the vein in the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the fields in hot lands such as Al-Ategi in the land of Arabia and in the hot and dry lands of India where there is little vegetation and no grass or crops.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And similarly, it is generated in other parts of the body apart from the fields.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its formation is through putrefaction that occurs below the skin, just as worms and vermin come from within the body, serpents and other creatures generating between the skin and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the occurrence of this event is that inflammation appears strongly in the field; and near the area, blisters form; and soon the vein begins to appear from the location of those blisters, resembling a plant sprout.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the extremity of it becomes apparent, you should then wrap around it a piece of lead weighing one drachma within two drachmas, and fix that area and leave the lead suspended from the field.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And so many times when you need something from outside for some reason, wrap it in lead and note that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is elongated, then cut a piece of it and wrap the remainder; and do not cut that end until it has come out, for if you cut that one it is contracted and goes into the flesh and causes abscesses and putrefaction in the place and a bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	It is necessary that it be treated gently and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the rear end and there remains nothing of it in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And this vein extends in some people to a length of five palms and I have been told that it has reached up to twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut during the time of its medication, then insert the reed into the tract and perforate that one along the body until everything inside the matter is evacuated, and treat putrefaction in the area with some medicines for a few days; afterwards, cure it according to the treatment of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and comes out through multiple openings, with each branch coming from one opening.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And thus treat it as we have said in the division and according to what has been mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	On the section concerning worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is called in some lands bovine disease because at times it occurs among cattle, and it is a worm that is born between the membrane and the flesh, which moves throughout the body up and down, and is noticeable to the sensation beyond the skin from member to member until it disrupts the membrane and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	Regarding the generation of worms, it is through the putrefaction of certain humors, just as happens with worms, serpents, and intestinal worms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	It is feared because of its malice, for when it enters the body and rises to the head, and reaches the heart, at that moment it forcefully penetrates and destroys the heart, causing many illnesses.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And so when you want to cure that and extract it, at that time it is done only by observing its movement and appearance in the patient's body. Then you should press on what is above it and what is below it with bandages and strong binding, and then dry it out to extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is embedded in the flesh and you cannot find it, then you should apply cauterization with fire to the area where it is located. The main cause of concern is the corruption of it, which can corrupt the location as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you see it reaching the head near the heart, then press strongly above the eyebrow and dry it out to extract it; and the patient should use purification of their body with medicines that evacuate foul and harmful humors, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Regarding the treatment of nasal ailments.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called "nafir" in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in certain limbs and then changes from one limb to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that as I will now describe to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to attend to a sick woman in a village, and when I uncovered her arm, I saw a small inflammation in the vein called funis on the arm. After it had been punctured for about an hour, I saw that inflammation moving, like a worm climbing up this way, but more quickly than one would expect, as if it were living silver moving from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	Then let the pain move from that place and settle in the muscle, and stay here for about one hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then move to the other side until it reaches the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I returned to the middle, where it was rotating throughout the body as I saw fit; and I was very amazed by the permutation of it and the speed at which it moved from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this before in my eyes according to that method, but now I have witnessed the pain being transferred from one member to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see this in my eyes as I did in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think this could be so unless it was because the woman was of such delicate constitution, with her two bodies and exposed veins, and in this way the airiness is perceived to be transferred.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this does not appear according to this retroversion in those who have delicate and moist bodies with prominent veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to treat it, and the patient feels that pain, then do not apply it to the eye as we have said, but instead press firmly on that area until the trapped air is released, and cauterize the location.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see this in your eyes, then treat it by evacuating the body and using what expels air, and apply plasters made of fetid pills and Serapi pills and similar remedies.
De extraccio de sagetas.	On the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse in kind and vary according to the parts of the body into which they strike. Their diversity is such that some have large points, others small points, some concave, others blunt; and among them there are those that are solid. Some arrows have three edges, while others have tongues or barbs.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And their diversity according to the limbs and parts of the body into which they strike is twofold: for the principal members or those similar to them, such as the brain, heart, liver, spine, lungs, ribs, bowels, bladder, and others like these; therefore, when you hit any of these members and signs of death appear before you (which I will explain later), then it is necessary to avoid extracting that arrow while the danger of death is greatest. But if no such bad signs appear and the arrow is not deeply embedded in a major organ, then extract it and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of an arrow striking the head are when the arrow penetrates and passes through the bone and emerges from the cephalus, which is above the brain. This occurs with sudden violent pain, scotoma (partial loss of vision), vertigo, stiffness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms, a mixture of understanding (confusion or altered perception), vomiting of bile, and speech may become impaired, and from the wound site comes out white moist substance similar to dust, and the appearance suggests an excess of moisture.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if these signs appear to you, then refrain from treatment and the extraction of the arrow unless it is outside the head.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	Here are the signs when an arrow hits the heart: it is near the left nipple, and you can feel that it is embedded in a hard object rather than in soft tissue; and the movement of the arrow is like the movement of a pulse, and there comes black blood from the wound, and coldness spreads to the extremities, and cold sweat appears, and fainting occurs; therefore, you know that death will come very soon.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are frothy blood from the wound, and the veins near the neck become swollen, and the complexion of the person changes, and they exhale a large breath, and they crave to breathe in air deeply.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow hits the membrane that is in the chest, and the pain at that moment is near the small ribs, and it causes great pain and sighing, and there is no movement of any of the body's muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow hits the stomach, immediately there will be vomit of some undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow hits the abdomen and is embedded there, causing a wound to split open, or damaging the membrane or bowel which is ruptured, then there is no hope for recovery from the extraction of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow hits the bladder and urine comes out from it, and there is leakage to other parts outside, and immediately there is pain over the patient, then you know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	And other limbs as well, such as the face, the neck, and the jaw, the shoulders and the arm muscles, the spine of the back, the collarbone, the chest, the ribs, and similar parts of the limbs, are saved according to their major functions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	Here is the translation:
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of this is that in a man an arrowhead entered through the tear duct near the root of the nose, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving behind the bones of the ear, and he healed without damage to the eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrowhead from a Jew, the arrowhead entered into him near his eye, leaving behind the eyelid and then further inside, where the arrow was hidden and could not be completely removed except for a small part that adhered to its shaft. It was a large sharp Turkish arrow with an iron tip shaped like a lion’s head, which had no feathers.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew healed, and no harm came to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had it embedded in his groin, and it was an Arabian arrow with feathers. Then I incised around that between two grooves, and it was submerged in the tissue of his groin; then I carefully worked on it and subsequently removed it, and the Christian healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who had it embedded in his abdomen, and he was thought to be going to die because of it; but after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition, I incised around the arrow and worked on it, and he healed without any harmful incident.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow was embedded between his shoulder blades, and the wound had healed over it, but after about seven years, the arrow came out at the base of his neck.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow was embedded in her abdomen, and the wound had healed over it inside her, and there was no change in her condition, and the woman did not experience any harm in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And there was another man in whose face an arrow was embedded and the wound had healed over the arrow, so that it could not be removed without pain, and his appearance seemed normal.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And the arrow was removed from the man of the king's council, which was embedded in the middle of his nose and had slightly shifted to the right side, with the entire arrow being hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for his treatment regarding the embedding of the arrow within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I found the wound of the arrow quite narrow; and then I examined it carefully, but did not feel anything there; however, he felt pain below his right ear, and then I suspected that this pain was due to the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I covered the area with a plaster that has attractive and digestive properties, expecting that the area would swell so that it would become clear to me where the arrow was, so that I could act upon it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And no significant change occurred in the area where I suspected the arrow might be; and I continued to cover it with the plaster for several days without any incident; and the wound had healed by then, but on one day I felt the arrow inside his nose and recognized this as such.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied a sharp and corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it softened, and with careful examination, I found the tip of the arrow slightly adhering to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I proceeded to open the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow became visible to me, and it took me four months to reach this point.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	When the pus has caused the swelling to increase and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, I remove that [pus], without any delay in doing so. At that point, I do not seek to devise or think of other methods, but rather one day I began using forceps made for this purpose, as will be shown at the end of the chapter, and with these I extract it; then I proceed to treat the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	Some surgeons judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored, but I have restored it and the wound has healed properly, and the patient was completely cured without any cause for concern.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting certain arrows so that you may apply this rule and significance to what has not been mentioned, for the parts of this art and the definitions of these are not understood in narration nor by reading the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the skilled artisans compare a few things through analogy; and with what is present they infer about what is absent; and when new operations or instruments are encountered, they should deduce the causes from outside the art.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And thus I say that arrows are not removed from the members in which they are inserted except in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they enter; or by the opposite part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is removed by the place where it entered either is an arrow proceeding from a fleshy location and is drawn out.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not act immediately at the hour when you catch it, then you should leave it for several days until the flesh around it becomes softened and loses its attraction to it and its ability to hold it back.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And so it seems to be fixed in the bone and if you do not obey this method, leave it alone for several days and then bring it back into place with traction and motion each day, and thus it will be dislocated.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey this method for several days, then you should pierce around the circumference of the bone at that point with a fine awl until the space is widened for the bone, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is embedded in the bone of the head and has penetrated one of the cavities of the brain, and if any of those symptoms which I have mentioned appear in the injury, then abstain from extracting the arrow and leave it inside until its condition improves after several days; for if the arrow reaches the heart, death will not be delayed.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is embedded only in the body of the bone and does not pass into the heart, and the injury remains for several days without any of those symptoms occurring, then you should devise a means to extract the arrow with traction.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is embedded and you do not obey this extraction method, then administer probes around the circumference of the arrow as we have recommended, and afterward care for the wound until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is hidden in the part of the body and is concealed from sight, then you should probe for it with a probe, and if you can feel it, then remove it using instruments that are appropriate for its extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the shaft, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein here, then enlarge the wound until it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is in the ears which are pierced, then carefully remove the flesh in which it is embedded on all sides as much as you can; and endeavor to do this, if not by avoiding damage to the flesh in fractures of the ears and in twisting them until they obey.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you perform the extraction of the splinter in any place where it is, then use twisting with your hand and forceps on all sides until it obeys; and delicately with utmost care that the splinter does not break and that it becomes difficult to grasp and extract.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do this immediately, then leave it for several days until the parts around it become firm, and then attempt again when the situation has improved.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if there is contrary blood flow, then you should administer what we have mentioned for treatment in the respective chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard against the possibility of incision into a vein, nerve, or tendon, and administer care in every possible way to avoid damaging the splinter; do this with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness as I have recommended and advise.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And thus when you make the splinter adhere according to the figure according to which the wound of the splinter should be set, for it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But splinters that are ejected from the opposite side, or which you have already processed some part towards the exterior, or cause redness at the extremity of the splinter due to pus formation above the wound and protrude slightly; then you should act on this; and cut it according to the amount that the forceps grasp; and then pull it out, for it is now easy to extract.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is retained in the bone, then at that time turn it according to the opposite direction until the arrow presses against the bone, and enlarge it thus, and then extract that one.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for several days, and then try again until it comes out.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is there, then push it out from there.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft is embedded and you want to administer impulse, then insert and use it; if it is blunt, use a concave instrument so that it fits into the curve of it with the arrow's socket and then push it out from there.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the arrow is concave, then push it out with a strong instrument by inserting it, for the arrow is lightened by this.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then ensure that you hollow out all the flesh in which it is embedded, if it is possible for you to do so, and then treat it with what is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow penetrates into the foot, or into the belly, or into the bladder, or into the side, and is close so that you touch it with your finger, and it is possible for you to operate on it, then cut around it and guard against injuring any veins or nerves, and extract it, and then treat the wound as needed, and cure it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps with which arrows are pulled:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the extremities of these be shaped like the beak of a bird, which are made like pincers so that they do not let go of the arrow.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	Of those are made various types of incisions, large, few and medium-sized, according to the quantity of the arrow's size and the scarcity of the pus, and the extent of the wound, and the constriction of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form the concave shape of this extremity as if it were the wing of a bird so that the instrument of the arrow may be pushed in easily, and push from that blunt end.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of the pushing blunt extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Like a rod so that the instrument may be easily pushed into the concave arrow and is thus propelled by it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	On phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for phlebotomy, of which it is customary to perform phlebotomy at xxx points. Of these, sixteen are in the head: two pulsating veins near the ears, called alhasisain; two visible veins on each temple; and two veins near each tear duct under the eyes, called aspicientz; one vein located in the middle of the forehead and another at the tip of the nose; two veins on either side of the neck; two veins on the upper lip; and two veins on the lower lip; these are also referred to as algelic veins; and there are two veins below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The veins that are phlebotomized in the arms total five. Among these is one cephalic vein, which is also known as the wild leaf; and people call it "the head vein," blunt, and it is a medium-sized vein, composed of a branch from the basilica vein, and another branch from the cephalic vein; and they name this the people's "whole body vein"; basilica is the vein located in the domestic side (arm), and it is called "citillar," and the common people call it "the belly vein." There is also the funis of the arm, which lies over the elbow, and this is where phlebotomy is performed; it appears prominently on the forearm. Lastly, there is the salvatella vein, located between the thumb and the little finger, appearing in two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the thigh and the buttock there are three veins; one of them is that which is behind the curvature of the tailbone of the wild animal; and the second is sophena, and its place is behind the buttocks of the domesticated animal; and the sciatic vein, and its place is behind the buttocks of the wild animal; and in the buttock there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The treatment of the veins near the ears is for catarrhs, chronic diseases, abscesses, and old ulcers of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those veins is as I recommend to you: it should be done at the top of the patient's head, and the patient's head should be rubbed in the occipital area where both veins are, with a large cloth for good friction; tighten the patient's neck with a bandage so that the two veins appear near their location close to the ears in two lower spots on the head; and feel those veins with your finger, and if you can feel the pulse of those veins with your finger, here is where you should start.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Take the lancet, and use that which is sharp, and insert it behind the vein into the tendon until the blood flows to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then raise your hand with the vein and the tendon to the upper parts and cut the vein with a sharp incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers spaced or around that amount; and let as much blood flow as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then press on the area with poultices and let it be treated until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And there is a preface at the beginning of the book on those and their cautery.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But of the two arteries, for the Templars the help of phlebotomy is to migraines ancient and often bad, and continuous ophthalmia, and bodies of acute excesses poured out into the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those is as I recommend to you: have the patient hold their neck so that the two veins appear clearly by sensation and feel the pulse below with your finger; then at this moment attempt it.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then raise the tourniquet above the vein towards your indicated finger, and incise the phlebotomy slightly below, and raise the vein up; and incise it as you have done with the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then loosen the patient's compression, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and afterwards place it on the cut and poultices, and bind it tightly above with strong compression, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And there is a reminder of them, and of their incision, and the attraction at the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus the help of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is for the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein in ancient diseases of the face and to alleviate headaches, tension, and foul-smelling ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of phlebotomy there is as I recommend to you; that is, the patient should hold their neck with a cloth so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument called a lancet, which has this shape:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the punctures at the point which is at the head of the artery above that vein and strike it from one side or another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity which you wish; and then untie the patient's binding and strengthen that within so that it may be healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And in some cases it is opened with a venesection, but it does not need to be that the venesection is of sharp extremity as the other venesections, rather it should be of flat extremity, and cut that across, for the bone is close and strong there, and the vein would easily break if the venesection were sharp.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	May the treatment of the two veins that are next to the tear ducts of both eyes be for eye itch due to pressure and grease in the eyes, and for illnesses of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the venesection is that the patient strengthens his arm with a bandage, and then you perform the venesection while standing over his head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the venesection should be performed across the length a little from the venesection site a little, for in that place there is no flesh; and if the venesection tool is sharp, the tip of it easily breaks.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and pause upon those cuts, and strengthen them for one night, and then untie them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	And the venesection of the vein of the nose is appropriate for acute fever and violent headache, and for illnesses of the face and migraines and pain that occurs in the face, especially when they are chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient strains his neck and approaches it to his nose with your left hand, and take the lancet thin long and fix it in the middle place of the tip of the nose according to straightness, for the vein does not appear to the sense here, and the blood begins to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Push your hand with the lancet little by little and make the blood flow according to your need; and then leave it for one night, for that place is quickly restored.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	But the harm of phlebotomy on the two veins leads to constriction of them and to the beginning of leprosy and to many diseases and impetigo and bad corrosive ulcers as well as herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that the patient strains each one on his neck with a cloth; and the practitioner stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then phlebotomize the vein at length with a wide lancet little by little; and then extract blood according to season, quantity or according as you need it; and then do the same for the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then untie the cloth and strain both veins with moderate pressure so that the patient is not overstrained, and leave it for the night as the plague is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the harm of phlebotomy of the large veins, compares to small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and cracks, and to bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	Of the quality of phlebotomy in those cases is that you make the patient sit before you, and tighten his head with a bandage, and then roll open his lips and look at two veins from which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of both, and this more so because around those very veins are small black veins; and then you cut each with a cutting incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If doubt is before you and you do not know which one it is, then you make an incision in the larger of those, and from the more apparent of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the appearance of the two veins that are above the lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But it is more common to incise the two veins that are below the lip rather than above.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But from the two veins that are below the tongue, phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is appropriate for hemorrhoids that are in the groin, for disease of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those veins is that you place the patient between you and the sun, and raise his tongue, and look below the tongue, on one side a vein and on the other side a vein, and the color of each tends toward blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then phlebotomize each one; and be careful not to go too far with your hand in phlebotomy of those veins, for below those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are phlebotomized in the neck usually run throughout all people, and the phlebotomy of them is done in two ways, either place on the phlebotomy site a small piece of myrtle or olive leaf which has a subtle blackish hue; or use scissors for phlebotomy and check if it bleeds, and this is the form of it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this is what is suitable for section and of those particular instruments that are fine and subtle according to the width of the veins and according to the tightness of those areas.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Method of mercurial venesection:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Use the instruments as described previously, and it is suitable to open concave full veins that appear thick, and those that contain thick turbid blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the method of olive venesection:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this venesection instrument is of lesser width and has a more subtle tip, and it is suitable for venesection of fine veins that contain thin, clear blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	But the benefit of venesection from the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: for it extracts blood from illnesses that affect below the jaw and neck, and from what congests the legs and abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is suitable for the venesection practitioner, when performing venesection on that vein, to be very careful with it and to act with great caution, because below it lies an artery. If he errs and punctures this artery instead of the vein, he will cut through the artery and cause a hemorrhage. Therefore, one should not use a piercing instrument for this venesection but rather a cutting instrument like a knife.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica vein does not appear clearly, then it is better to leave that one alone and switch to another vein or look for some branch of it. Or you may perform venesection at the end of the arm where it is more visible; and section that with a venesection instrument as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you wish to perform phlebotomy from the middle, place your hand above the constriction of the arm where you know the location between the wrists, and then press firmly on the inner side; then lift the arm and cut the vein in a concave manner for phlebotomy as we have said; and be careful not to hit the artery in that area.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see it, as you press the area, swelling occurs in the place that you pressed on the inside, then that swelling is arterial swelling, and therefore avoid that area.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flow during phlebotomy as it does in a child's urine, and the blood is fine and red, then you know that it is arterial blood; and then you hold your finger there for a long time; and afterwards remove your finger, and if the bleeding stops after a few moments, then press the arm there.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And warn the patient about the risk of infection, and advise them to avoid using that arm for some days until it is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	And if the bleeding does not stop, and there is no medicine available for it, then you should cut the artery if it appears to be necessary; because the limb is contracted, and the blood has stopped flowing. Or take a piece of cloth, and fold it, and apply half of it firmly over the vein in question with your hand and with bandages on another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the bleeding has stopped, that is good; but if not, then treat it with what has been prescribed for stopping blood flow, remembering the location of the bandages.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The removal of bone from that place is difficult in many positions because of the small space of the wound and the possibility of binding the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But for the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial to extract blood from the upper part of the head and from the lower part of the body; because it is composed of branches of the basilica and of branches of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And it is necessary for the phlebotomist to be overly cautious during phlebotomy in that area because below it lies a nerve; and then if you adjust your puncture for phlebotomy and touch the nerve, it will cause stupor, and healing from this is difficult, and rarely does one recover completely. This nerve appears to many as sensitive; and since it is hidden from some people and subtle, not shown, therefore it is necessary that you pause in the area where you perform phlebotomy on the elbow section, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should puncture the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it extracts blood from the head and relieves eye diseases.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And it is appropriate here to ensure that you perform phlebotomy on the olive vein or the myrtle vein; for it is the safest of all veins, as it is not near any artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	But it is necessary for you to perform phlebotomy such that you do not puncture only the head of the lizard, and seek a place further away, and do not note it unless it is discovered by the first percussion near where you intend to perform phlebotomy several times.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, sometimes an abscess occurs in some people, when it is not pus-filled upon the first probing, but we do not know for certain about that abscess.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	However, the quality of that incision and its consequences, in which one must think about their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is to know that an incision should not be administered except for the preservation of health and with hope and caution regarding the occurrence of illnesses. An incision should be made in one of the veins located on the arm: cephalic, fusca (which likely refers to another anatomical term or a vein location), and basilica. The incision should be performed at the beginning of spring, preferably after breakfast in both spring and autumn, and in winter near mealtime when signs of fullness appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And the incision should be made on the third day or when pus has appeared and three hours have passed since the morning.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	However, an incision that is administered should be done when there is convenience and necessity for it, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and at any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is necessary that a child not be given an incision until they are fourteen years old, and a woman who is pregnant should not have an incision performed on her unless it is between the fourth and seventh month, and women over sixty years of age should not be given an incision.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wishes to have an incision performed on them in some way, it is necessary for them to clean their bowels before the incision with a cleansing enema, if there is any retained fecal matter in them, so that the veins do not draw the superfluous substances into the incised bowels, which are purified, and so they do not affect the principal limbs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	Do not perform phlebotomy on patients who are nauseated or have drunkenness from illness or excessive drinking until they recover from it, nor on those suffering from dropsy. Also avoid phlebotomy when colic is present, after vomiting, and in cases of abdominal issues, as well as during frequent coitus, labor, exercise, fasting, or vigil, and any other cause that weakens the body's strength, whether physical or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And also take into account the subtlety of the body's fluids before doing this if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And also bathe if no cause prohibits it, or exercise in some way to make the blood thinner.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And avoid phlebotomy at the middle of the day, which is around the hour of terce, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And be sure that the patient's day is protected from all harmful animal incidents, such as anxiety, anger, and fear, and from all physical exertions, such as excessive labor, unnecessary hardship, intercourse, and similar activities.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at the time of his seating, have the causes present that are used by people for aromatics and odors and balms and similar things according to their quantity and possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And let the phlebotomist sit on a chair that is higher than the chair of the patient who needs to be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then have the patient's arm extended, and clean it with water by the phlebotomist two or three times; and then wrap the arm with a bandage using a strap two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let the ligature be timely placed, for if the ligature is not equal or if it is excessive, then you must prevent the flow of blood; or if it is too lax, and then you must restrict the course of the blood accordingly.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And regarding the ligature, it is necessary that the one who is to perform the phlebotomy wipe his hands thoroughly before beginning so that the veins are inflated and clearly visible.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And regarding the phlebotomy, the phlebotomist anoints his lancet with a little old oil properly. And then he places his finger of the left hand on the vein where he intends to perform the phlebotomy so that the vein protrudes slightly, and the percussion is made as if the veins were like cords fleeing from the phlebotomy, and those are full of air. When he presses the lancet onto it, if it does not yield, then that one is narrow and constricted; and if the lancet does not enter the vein, and if it enters, then that one is tight.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be firm and careful in all these matters.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then press the lancet, but if the vein is open in one spot, that is good. But if not, repeat this at another spot nearby, or with more urgency, if the location is not abscessed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is abscessed, or if the patient becomes feverish, then you let it be for a day or two, and do not bind tightly, as this will forcefully attract an abscess, nor should the patient bathe.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	Regarding arterial incision, if it is needed.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the opening is small and blood flows gently, and you fear that it will not yield the amount of blood you want, then repeat the arterial incision in that direction and make the opening slightly larger, but do this with haste before the area becomes abscessed, for an abscess often occurs after a small incision.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if you see that it has already become abscessed, then do not incise it further, for it will not serve any purpose; instead, apply a poultice of oil to that area, as it helps to disperse the blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And in this case, oil is better than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, administer an oil poultice in all arterial incisions where the blood flows despite the prohibition of its course, and use either theriac or sage when applied to the area, for the blood becomes refined and is dispersed when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large abscess is generated at the site of the arterial incision, which sometimes happens, especially in cases where it has not been done before or where the venous opening was small, then you should treat it by applying a sponge infused with water and salt, slightly heated, to the area for about an hour, as this will dissolve it.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And it is necessary to do this near the flow of blood from that vein or from another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if a black or greenish discoloration remains in the area for several days, do not be concerned; and if you wish, apply a poultice of aloes and powdered myrrh, or some preparation of mint juice or collyrium or something similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	From such swellings arise abscesses and elevations which require phlebotomy from the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	Therefore, place your hand on that area, and if you find softness there, apply pressure to that spot. Then that elevation is bad and harmful; therefore, be careful not to do any of what has been mentioned, for the blood will flow easily from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply a plaster with styptic properties to that area so the location becomes hardened, and then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And it is necessary to extract blood from everyone according to the quantity of their vitality and according to the color of the blood as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, then let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see it thick, then let it flow until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is acute, until the sharpness of it is alleviated.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And for one who is full and strong and has a need for bloodletting in one session, the phlebotomy from the vein should be increased and the bloodletting should be done slowly.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for one who is weak, the opposite should be done, and it is necessary to perform bloodletting in small quantities, and the procedure should be quick.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best method to use in venous bloodletting is the cross-section cut, not the puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of bloodletting is safe from excessive bleeding and from injury to nerves, and it is more beneficial and safer than bloodletting along the length and width of the vein.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	For such cases where fainting tends to occur due to phlebotomy, it is advisable that you treat this beforehand with a small amount of bread infused in the juice of grapes or in simple oxymel heated; and extract from the blood in three or four stages.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if there is stiffness due to constitution, then beforehand take bread infused in syrup of myrrh or in aromatic syrup sweetened with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and the like, or in an aromatic and fragrant syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs due to phlebotomy and is caused by the loss of too much blood, then it is advisable to drink watered-down syrup that is subtly fragrant; use aromatics with sugar, and let them sip it little by little.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting due to evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And for those who wish to prevent their arm from swelling and to dissolve their blood a second time, it is advisable that they do so when the phlebotomy is for more extensive evacuation, and the effect of which is gradual, allowing the blood to be evacuated little by little, as is according to the quantity of its strength over continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But for those who wish to prevent their arm from swelling and to treat their blood a second time, and whose body is strong, then they should do this about seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But for those who wish to draw the blood from their body in the opposite direction to the side towards which it tends to flow, it is advisable that they be bled on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	When the body in which blood is heated and becomes acrid and causes fever occurs, it should be bled in one session and a large quantity of blood should be taken out to prevent fainting, so that you may preserve all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on the pulse of the patient whose body contains blood, so that he does not die instead of fainting, because often this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, since the openings of the vein are now closed and it is difficult for the blood to flow out, do not press too forcefully or bend it abruptly, because this can be harmful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Handle the wound carefully so that it can be phlebotomized again; or this may happen due to the coagulation of blood at the opening of the vein; or place on it some theriacal plaster, or sage leaves, and compress it gently until the blood has fully come out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, leave that area alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood a second time and there is no excuse to avoid it, then bleed at that location or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "the rope of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the fossa or basilic vein when they are not accessible or hidden, as it consists of these.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient should immerse their hand in warm water until it reddens, so that the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	About this ligature with stricture in the middle, tie it tight; and make the incision transversely at the narrow part, not latitudinally or longitudinally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	Make the opening wide and perform your incision where you make the puncture slightly above the joint of the hand.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is restricted, now move the hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your goal.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are during the days of summer, now you are excused from moving the hand in hot water, and similarly, pause the flow of blood in hot water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the incision of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, for there are no pulsating veins or nerves there.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the incision of the right hand little finger is appropriate for diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of this incision is that you tie the hand with a ligature or with your hand, after placing it in hot water, until the vein becomes swollen and is clearly visible to the observer; then make the incision transversely; and if you do not incise it properly, nothing will come of it.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And be careful not to leave your hand on the incision site for too long, since there are nerves of the aforementioned areas that are exposed.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then move the hand in hot water and let the blood run there, for if you do not move it in hot water, the blood will coagulate at the vein opening, and the flow will be restricted.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when you have extracted the blood in the required quantity, pause on the vein with oil and salt so that it does not clot immediately; similarly, this should be done in every case carefully.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The benefit of phlebotomy from the vein on my left side is that it is beneficial for diseases of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do likewise in the phlebotomy here as you have done with the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of the phlebotomy from the sephena vein is for diseases that affect the lower part of the body, such as kidney diseases, and for retention of menstruation, and for diseases of the joints and ulcers of old injuries, and similar conditions.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the procedure for this phlebotomy is that the patient immerses their foot in hot water until the veins become visible; and place a bandage around the ankle; and the site of the vein is on the back of the heel, and from there it branches out into several lines on the surface of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore, phlebotomize the largest branch below the joint behind the heel, because it is better and more effective.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are below that area on the surface of the foot, and pause your phlebotomy at where you would cross it, as if you were going to cut across it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the phlebotomy be gentle.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	If you are prohibited from using leeches to draw blood, then place the foot in hot water and let the blood flow freely until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist errs on the first attempt, then proceed with another incision a little higher up, since the area is bony; and do not fear malice, but be cautious of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And do the same for the vein on the other foot equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, the location as we have said is below the heel, near the arch of the foot.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the best time for phlebotomy is in the afternoon when the blood is thick.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient enters a bath, and quickly and tightly wraps the area on the side of the hip above the heel with four fingers in a thin bandage, as it should not appear otherwise.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then perform phlebotomy on that area according to each individual case as is possible and according to the transverse position, which is better; or incise that area by incision or cut it by cutting, since the location is bony.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in the words "halfway between"; and if you find that area, and it does not appear to full sensation, then perform phlebotomy on one of its branches, which appears on the foot between the thumb and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be careful of the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity that you desire.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then loosen the ligature and apply pressure over the site of the phlebotomy cut and strengthen the area, for it heals quickly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	On wind exposure and the qualities of using those [methods].
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Wind injuries are mostly to horns, or ears, or eyes.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Wind exposure is done in two ways: one involves incision and bloodletting, and the other is wind exposure without incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this wind exposure that is without incision is done in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And for wind exposures that are administered with incision and bloodletting, there are fourteen sites on the body, of which one is where wind exposure for alnocrati purposes is applied, at the back part of the head; another site is near both sides of the neck; wind exposure of the chin below the jaw, next to the mouth; wind exposure of both cheekbones; wind exposure of alohoster, which is above the temples; wind exposure of two armpits; wind exposure of both upper arms; and wind exposure of both thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Wind exposure does not extract blood but from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and through this, one does not capture the virtue as is done with phlebotomy; nor is it necessary for wind exposure to be performed with or without fire in any disease caused by internal congestion until the entire body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity prompts wind exposure due to illness or for a continuous period, administer it at any time at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, in the middle of the month and at some times during it.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that in men in whom blood is multiplied within because of bleeding by flux and finds weight and hardness in their head and neck; and from those who find congestion and hardness in their face and in their head, and in their neck; and from those who find swelling in their face and on their forehead and darkness and dullness in their eyes; and from those whose place of flux is there; and from those whose laughter is multiplied; and from those who taste blood in their mouth, or whose tongue is coated and they spit blood; and from those whose sleep is multiplied, and from those who see blood in their sleep hardness and old age and plagues and other causes like them.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And when you encounter any of those causes, and particularly if it is in the third or middle part of the month, I command that bleeding be performed two or three hours after sunset.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the benefit of bleeding from the neck is that when you encounter heaviness in the head and sinking to the eyes; but it should be done near complete evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this bleeding is in the site of phlebotomy of the cephalic region.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not appropriate to use bleeding on one who is completely exhausted, or in one who has a cold, for it causes great harm to them.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And because of this, it is not appropriate to use that on the elderly, and in those whose heads are often ill.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But for one who is repeatedly bled in this manner, memory loss may occur; and because of this, you should command the person performing the bleeding to pause their hand briefly after removing the cup to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Here is the translation:
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	Let it be raised slightly the windy alkali, for if it is placed below, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the windy nature of alhagdahan causes pain in the head and ocular disorders, and migraines, and nosebleeds, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is used instead of bloodletting from the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	Let it be commanded to the ventozador that he not press too hard during scarification so as not to injure the artery and cause blood flow issues.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And the windy nature below the chin causes alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gum, and resembles the symptoms of illnesses that are in the mouth, and is used instead of bloodletting from aliheric which is between the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But the windy nature that is applied to the two palm sides causes caphatan, which is caused by an excess of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the windy nature of the two inner sides of the fingers causes the efficacy of bloodletting from three veins, which are the basilica, fusca, and cephalic, for it attracts the blood from all those veins that are close to the skin, and from the smaller veins within the larger ones until the attraction reaches the three main veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the ventozador not to proceed too much in scarification, for the area is bare of flesh and below lies the nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a windy substance with which one applies treatment to the buttocks and it causes hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers below.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you command the surgeon to make a large incision, and it should be deep, for the place requires strong drying; and let thin superficial scrapings with sharp instruments be applied.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Small incisions on the sides should be made carefully, for they attract blood from all parts of the body, and alleviate old pains in the loins and uterus, and in the bladder; they induce menstruation and help with boils and abscesses; and serve as a substitute for phlebotomy at two elbows, and one wrist, and two ankles.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, they weaken the whole body and cause syncope in some people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And the incision on the wrist is appropriate for treating conditions that the incisions on both sides are suitable for.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the incisions is that you place the incision at its beginning and then gradually follow with suction at an appropriate time, and do not prolong the placement of the incisions, but pause them lightly, and replace them carefully, so that the humors come to the site appropriately.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the area turn red and swell, and until the vigor of the blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And now you should make incisions and gradually continue the suction, and appropriately consider the condition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For the person with tender flesh and few pores, you should scarify once and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the surgeon to enlarge the incision slightly and to perform suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thickened, then it is necessary to scarify twice, because in the first time the way of subtlety for the blood and its moisture is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	And in the second time, to the acquired skill of extracting thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is muddy, then a third scarification should be performed so that it may achieve the desired result.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or in small amounts, one scarification is sufficient for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract thick blood, we perform two scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to perform a stronger scarification.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scarification refers to the depth of the incision alone.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the skin where the scarification is to be made is thick, hard, dark, and the pores are narrow, it is necessary to anoint the places for cupping with soothing, opening, and resolving oils; if it is in summer, then oil of aloes, violet oil, almond oil, or linseed oil; and if it is in winter, then narcissus oil, lily oil, camomile oil, or bloodroot oil, and similar preparations.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick and congealed, then the oil should be of amaranth, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or anise oil, and similar preparations.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the area where the cupping is to be done has wide pores and soft flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and the places for cupping near the scarification should be washed with rose water or cold water mixed with solutrum, or almond water, or borage water, and similar preparations.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	For him whose blood is of thick humidity, wash his wounds with warm water, or with water of myrtle and sumach and similar to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	For him whose superfluities are thick, wash his wounds with warm water, or with water of savory, which is marjoram, or of fennel decoction, or chamomile, and similar to those.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it is necessary that the wound be guarded before bathing; give it so that it is administered shortly after bathing for an hour or two, and let him sleep near the wound.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is needed to be done to regulate the wound or bloodletting before treating the wound.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	At the beginning, if the wounder or one who needs to be bled is choleric and the wound is on hot and inflamed blood, then it is necessary for them to take cooling causes, such as sour grapes, endive in warm water and lettuce, sesame seeds, julep, and similar.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And allow them to eat such foods as poultry, and meats of suitable birds, and seasoned foods with herbs, and similar.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	For him whose constitution is weak, let him drink syrup of lemon, or syrup of sweetened sesame seeds and sumac, and warm water with moderate pleasant odor between evening and midnight; and let it be recommended to him to use little drinking and eating, and avoid foods of poultry and fish and small birds and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is necessary that on the day of wound treatment and bloodletting, drinking should be more than food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	That it should be given to drink at certain times to some men theriac or alpharach medicine, or musk, or alicant before the wind or before phlebotomy or nearby, so that the principal members are comforted and that the blood be refined; and it is not necessary for them to take that hot mixture.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	The winds that are due to incision should be made on the back, over the kidneys and gout, and over the navel, in the places of the ribs, and at the pit of the stomach, for these members do not endure incision upon them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not sought for these but to draw blood from a member, just as we apply a cupping vessel over the breast in illness of flux of blood from the nose; and they use that to dissolve congealed wind in the limb, just as we apply them on the belly and the navel; for that rarefies the limb and heats it and removes the pain by resolving the wind.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is applied to the nostrils when they are obstructed or diseased, for by the power of suction it easily removes obstructions and eradicates pus from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly it does when applied to the back and kidneys due to wind that is enclosed there.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these cupping vessels are administered only with suction; and some are applied over fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some are administered full of warm water in illnesses of the kidneys.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is so that the cupping vessel be full and be larger, either with hot water alone or with water in which herbs have been boiled for this purpose.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Shape of the cupping glass applied to the fire: let the width of its opening be as we have made it; and the amount of pitch [used] shall be half a palm; and in the middle of it, at the place where the circle is, let there be a depression, which should be small enough for a needle to fit inside.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let it be made of iron or copper, with thick edges, smooth, and polished so that it does not hurt the limb when placed upon it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let there be across the middle of it an iron or metal crossbar, on which is placed a candle for lighting.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this cupping glass should be larger than the one we have recommended; and the smaller ones shall vary according to the illnesses and the condition of the person using them.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the cupping glasses for children and those who are weak should be smaller than those for young and strong people.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this cupping glass over the fire upon the limb is that you should hold it above the fire of wood decently in front of a small candle made of wax, and place it directly on the crossbar at the middle part of the cupping glass, so that the flame is lit around the lower part to prevent it from burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And it should then be placed upon the limb of the patient, and the hand should cover the depression we have mentioned until when we have the cupping glasses but do not wish to keep the hand there so that the vapor rises over that depression, at that time the cupping glass will dissolve quickly.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And hold the cup above the fire according to its method, and repeat this if you need to use it again.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Here is the translation:
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: And the larger this suction cup is, all the better, because it can receive a greater quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter xcviij.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting should not be administered in most members but rather in those members where the application of suction cups is not possible due to their small size, such as the gums and similar areas; or on parts bare of flesh, such as the fingers and nose and similar areas.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those leeches that you have found should be in the waters from clean, unpolluted sources.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then they should be left in clean water day and night until they are hungry, so that there is no remaining cause in their belly; and then the body should be evacuated at the beginning of bloodletting and suction cup use; and then rub the affected member until it reddens; and then place them on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and satisfied.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if suction can be applied to the area with a cup, it is better for relief.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the area with warm water and subsequently with cold water; and it should be rubbed and pressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the blood vessels are extended near the site of the leeches and there is residual blood, then you should place a piece of cloth on cold water, and apply it over the area until the bleeding stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the bleeding increases, then sprinkle powdered vitriol or similar astringent substances on it until the bleeding stops; or place crushed fava beans on the site, and leave them until the beans adhere to the area, at which point the bleeding will stop.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	In circumcision, if it is necessary, repeat the procedure of bloodletting when it is possible to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the bloodletting is prohibited from suspension, then at that time wash the place with fresh blood or insert a needle into the places until it bleeds; and afterwards they should be paused, because those when feeling any blood will soon heal.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want to stop bleeding, sprinkle a little powdered aloes, salt, or ash on it, and the bleeding will soon stop.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the chapter of the third part: on restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is considered necessary in the art of medicine; it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations of bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, be aware that this chapter is boasted about by foolish doctors and the vulgar, and by those who for any length of time have not heeded the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is done that this method of the scientists in our land is private; and I have not forgotten any of it in all that time; and I have not applied what follows, but through the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying to understand them, extracting the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And subsequently I directed myself to experimentation and study throughout the duration of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter everything that my science and experience contain; now I condense it for you to spare you the burden of lengthiness; I abbreviate it at the end of brevity; and demonstrate it at the end of clarity; and present many forms of instruments used in those treatments, as is done through addition of explanation, just as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	A summary and collection of what is necessary for the treatment of fractures of bones, including those prerequisites that are essential before we begin to recall the parts of broken limbs and their various treatments.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us begin the prologue of this chapter with a summary of the discourse; and the chapters will be presented to those whose understanding requires that they first pause on the truth of these matters; so you and others like you who wish to know or learn this noble art from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when it happens to someone to suffer a fracture, dislocation, torsion, or fall, at that moment it is necessary for you to consider at the beginning whether to perform venesection or to wait, depending on the circumstances, unless some cause prohibits it, such as weakness of strength, or if the person who suffers from it is an infant, elderly and decrepit, or if it is a time of extreme heat or severe cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And let the patient be content with light food such as fresh herbs and meat of birds and small animals; we prohibit heavy meats and foods that fill the body, and all kinds of food that fill the veins with blood, until you are sure of a safe condition regarding abscesses, and if you do not fear an effusion of matter into the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And now return the patient to their usual regimen that they were accustomed to follow.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the broken bone begins to be restored, at this time it is necessary for the patient to be fed with nutritious foods that are moist and heavy, which have viscosity, such as foods made from boiled wheat with water, rice, peas, beans, cow's stomachs, hens, fresh cheese, thick soups, and similar items. With this regimen, coagulation of the fracture occurs more easily and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that the bones in those who are thin, just as in infants and in the elderly, cannot be joined and consolidated according to their nature by the drying of the limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are joined and consolidated according to their nature for a long time by the drying of those limbs, and similarly joined and consolidated are those that remain in perfect condition until the end of youth, just as the bones of small infants.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature adjusts and applies them over the broken bone from every part for some cause similar to glue, in which there is a thickness that adheres and strengthens it as they are conjoined together, until they come to an end of strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, without any cause prohibiting them from completing their work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary that the patient abstain from foods that are heavy, viscous, and thick, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The variety of fractures depends on the diversity of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the bone in the arm is different from a fracture of the bone in the head; and a fracture of the bone in the foot is different from a fracture of the bone in the back; and similarly all other members are different among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I wish to provide a recapitulation of every type of fracture, explained in its own separate chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	The diversity of fractures within themselves.  
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the types of fractures in bones are diverse in their locations; for one kind of curved fracture is different from that which occurs in the stars [likely meaning "skull"]; and some transverse fractures occur according to the length of the bone: and among the fractures of the shaft, splinters, and comminuted injuries, both those that proceed and do not proceed, just as when paper is prepared for writing, there is a fracture with a crack and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for each type there is a particular torment proper in the restoration of the second, which will come as a recall of the distinct ones in their places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A sign of a bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this a bone fracture is known: its twisting, and the prominence and appearance of it to the touch, and how it feels when you press on it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when there is no visible twisting or deformation and when you touch the bone with movement and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	There might be twisting or a small fissure, so do not press on it with your hand and through compression of the entire area; instead, apply one of the medicines about which there will be a recall at that moment when you consider appropriate; and it may be tight due to subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you should know that the place where it is curved and not split into two or more as occurs in the shaft, as the whole part of its comparison is bent, then you should begin from your time to the correction of what affects it until an abscess forms.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess occurs in it, do not delay for any number of days waiting for the abscess to cease; rather, bind that according to every method you can by lightness and ingenuity.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration of it and the alignment of it is quicker than that of the bone in which such dislocation occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen that according to what will come to your recollection of it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if the bone is dislocated, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from two parts, whether it be the hand or the foot; or by your hand if the member is small; or by two ropes or by one rope and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And place yourself in a position where you can put the limb back in its proper location according to its natural shape, while the parts of the broken member are extended, then force yourself to return those adductions with skill and according to every method that you can into their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And guard yourself according to your strength so that no harm befalls the patient due to your operation or injury; and force yourself according to your ability to apply one bone to its companion bone according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is necessary that at that opportune moment you act skillfully with your hand, and if you see any divergent cause, correct that and adjust it according to the extent of your ability.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive extension and compression, just as some foolish doctors often cause an abscess by their operation, or cause contraction in the limb as we have seen happen due to their repeated handling.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	In attaching the bandage, attach it with proper alignment and arrangement of that limb, and ensure rest and tranquility; warn the patient about this and make him avoid anything that might harm that part during his waking hours and sleep, and observe his movements and agitation, and attend to his excretions, and watch all his movements with full vigilance; and wait until the position of the limb is such that it ensures relief from pain, which is because when it is in a state of pain or injury due to the position of the limb; then you must change its position to one where there is no pain; and guard against this so that the position remains straight and equal, so that tortuosity does not occur in the limb when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the bandaging of the tranquilized limb is what I recommend; for you should know that broken limbs vary in their smallness and largeness and in the form of each one.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small like the arm and the hand and the forearm and similar to these, then the wrapping should be of soft fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But for those that are large like the thigh or the chest, it is necessary to wrap them with linen and a hard material, because the wrapping of linen connects the large limb and strengthens it evenly in all directions, so that no dirt enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And when you begin, after proper alignment of the fracture, pause conveniently for that, at the site of the fracture with three or four wrappings depending on the limb; and tighten your hand slightly with the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then proceed to the upper part of the site of the fracture, and tighten moderately so that your bandaging does not hurt at the place where you have already tightened the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	From around the fracture, extend the bandage a little, and gradually loosen the tightness, until you take from the area a large part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Then take another bandage and wrap it around the fractured area one more time, and then tie the bandages to a part further down from the fracture; and your operation should be in the tightening of the bandage and the loosening of that as we have said about the first bandage above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Then place between the bandages a piece of linen or cloth that matches the curvature of the fracture if there is any curvature; and if not, do not pause for any reason in that area.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Then place another bandage on top, and immediately apply plasters properly made if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area, and at that time place over what causes the abscess and reduces the inflammation; and leave it like this for several days; and then you will strengthen it with the plasters.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the plasters be about half a palm wide and well made; or they can be of willow bark; or of palm leaves; and the width of each plaster should be according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the plaster that is placed over the fracture should be slightly thicker and wider than the others, and the length of the plaster should match the size of the limb; then reinforce the plasters with another bandage according to your initial tightening; and tie it above with a knot properly as we have said about tightening, and this should be your tightening more so near the location of the fracture, and the further away from the fracture, the less should be the tightening.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And let the threads be of medium thickness and fineness, and let them be soft; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in some foolish surgeons using cords from a sheep's gut for their stitches, it is a great error, when one sees the tension uneven.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And likewise, fine threads are not suitable either, for you will not achieve the desired tension with them, and it is necessary that there be at least a finger's width between stitch and stitch.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is in pain at the ends of the threads near the stitches in those places, then pause and use threads of linen or carded wool until it does not cause injury to them.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes fractures occur due to a blow, and there is a disruption in the bone, and I will recall this case in the chapter dedicated specifically to such singularities.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not all broken limbs should be set with stitches on the first day; the reason for this is that when the limb is large, it should not be placed in bandages but left loose for about five or seven days, or more, depending on your certainty regarding the risk of suppuration.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of plasters used by the Ancients for treatment, which were applied over fractures, dislocations, and contortions.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of applying a plaster for the quick restoration of a fracture, suitable for various injuries and particularly for women and children, as it does not cause heat or irritation: take powdered flour, which is the fine residue that adheres to the walls of the mill during grinding.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And confine it as it is, but sieve that with white cloth, and pause the preparation if it is not thin or subtle; and then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method for plasters to treat fractures, dislocations, and twists: recipe for asafetida, ledanum, acacia, inula, and migraech, which is the seed of wild millet, each one drachm; of myrrh and aloes each five drachms; aloe juice twenty drachms; all should be ground and sieved together with aqua alichil or with white cloth if the preparation of the plaster is heated; and then use this plaster, for it is well composed and quickly restores broken bones, and confers great benefit to many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method for a plaster to treat fractures and twists: recipe for migraech (seed of wild millet) and juice of white mulberry each one drachm; myrrh and aloes each five drachms; acacia six drachms; Armenian bole twenty drachms.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All should be triturated in a mortar with a stone pestle, and then sieved, and mixed with water or white cloth if the preparation is heated, and it should be administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method for a plaster for joints and bones that have moved from their places, and for severe pain in those areas and for cracks and fractures: take clean wool and immerse it in sour wine and hot oil and apply it to the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	Moreover, in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, but it is good for treating boils and properly expelling pains.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method for a plaster that restores a broken bone: take fresh mulberry leaves and wild poppy leaves; mix them together and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of making a quick plaster to administer for the restoration of a bone fracture and when you want resolution of the remaining abscess: take rue, camomile flowers, violets, and flour of barley, of each one part; mix all together and cook with wine, but do not scald the member.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it does scald, now confect that with cold cilantro water or with water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of making a stronger plaster for resolution than this first one, when there occurs a hard abscess during the restoration of the limb: take rue, linseed, hawthorn, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, of each one equal part; mix all together and cook with sage water or with sweet water or with wine, whichever suits the quality of the limb and according to the condition of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	However, Hippocrates does not say in his book that it should be paused on the broken limb during its restoration except for a cerote made of wax and oil, and nothing else; he recommends that it should be midway between coarseness and fineness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	However, Galen is seen to have applied them on the broken limb during its restoration and for causes where there is slight drying with warmth as well as substances like myrrh and onions, similar to those causes which we have mentioned.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of making a plaster to relieve injury and pain: take linseed, chickpeas, human hair or bird's feathers, rue, and salt, of each equal parts; mix them together, sift them, and cook them, then make the plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The quantity according to which it is necessary for the bandage to remain and then be loosened is that you consider whether pain does not occur or improvement does not happen and the bone is not dislocated from its place; then you do not loosen it for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if intense pain or improvement or inflammation occurs at the site, then you should be cautious or loosen that bandage immediately, and remove the plaster.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a cloth and sponge made of marine leather and soak it in cold water, then with that wash the site until the inflammation subsides and the pain is alleviated; then allow the limb to rest for an hour; afterwards place it on wool soaked in sour wine and oil or scented oil, and bandage it for one night until you are sure of no abscess forming, and until the swelling of the limb subsides and the pain is reduced.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then iteratively apply that gentle bandaging and small plaster without tightening it as much as your initial constriction, and gently do this until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you find that the abscess and hardness and pain and swelling and all other symptoms have subsided completely, and you need a plaster and bandaging, then proceed as you did at the beginning similarly.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if nothing happens to the limb from any of the causes we have mentioned, then do not loosen it until after three days or four or ten or seven; and in some cases all this is left for twenty days, as you see fit by loosening the bandage, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and the coagulation of the flesh around it sets.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	At this point, adjust the tightness more than in your first initial tightening, and adjust according to the swelling of the patient's body, as was previously mentioned.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you see the site of the fracture already drying and withering more than it should, then you will know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching there; therefore, apply tepid water compresses to that area every day for three days; and loosen the bandage slightly, so this operation directs nutrition to the limb, and it heals quickly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	However, what the inexperienced restorers do when restoring a fractured limb later than it should be and in a tortuous manner, according to their procedure, is an error and causes great fear; if this were correct, the Ancients would have enlarged upon it in their books and approved such practice.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do that, which is why it is more reasonable to not do so.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter Second: Concerning fractures when they occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are many, and their figures vary, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the impact of an object, which removes all the bone within the cranium, leaving behind only the inner layer of bone, similar to what happens in wood when struck; thus, this type is called a concussion. Or an object may cut some part of the bone, cutting through the flesh but not penetrating further inside; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the severity of these two fractures can be either great or slight, and there is also the fracture known as comminuted or crushed; the cause of this is impact from a weak object or falling on a stone, and similar circumstances.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating which is already approaching the panniculus, which is below the bone; or it is on the face of the bone, and the severity of these two fractures is great or little.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of the fracture which is weakened in the bone, in the subtlety of the thin strands, and by this it is named this species of fracture capillar.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is made either by falling or by the impact of a stone and similar objects, which causes some lamina of the bone to enter into the soft parts inside, and it is made in the concave place as well as when it happens to rib bones when they are impacted and split upon entering the inner parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this is mostly made in the bones of human bodies, as well as such heads of children.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And for all these kinds of fractures, treatments are used, which are splints or bandages separated from each other.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will return to the reminder of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And you will know all these kinds of fractures by detection on them and by inquiry into their weaknesses and the appearance of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary fracture is known by this: it is revealed on the bone, and when it is wiped clean, it appears as a weakness on it, because the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	But in the treatment of fractures, consider at the beginning the symptoms of the patient, and if you see from these symptoms that it signifies by clear indication fear, as with vomiting of bile, extension, loss of understanding, hoarseness, fainting, acute fever, and similar symptoms of distress and rigidity, and such are present in the major conditions, then doubt whether they will be healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if for unusual accidents you hope for a cure, then at that time you begin the treatment of them.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	Which cause is four when the patient comes to you at the beginning as a patient and this is in the days of winter, then it is necessary that you study the condition of the bone until the day fourteen according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then it is necessary that you wait to remove the bone until the seventh day, because what is before the bone may become gangrenous, and accidents which we have recounted may occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the membrane covering the brain and is divided into small parts and is torn, then it is necessary that you excise the comminuted and torn part, as I shall recount to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you shave the head of the patient, and expose the bone according to custom and method as best you can according to the figure of the injury, so that it is clear on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you that you need the detection of the bone, bleeding or an abscess cauterized, then you must proceed with what is necessary, which is to apply the area with cloths infused in vinegar and rose water, and let the wound rest until the abscess is subdued, and be sure there is no more bleeding; and afterwards begin the circuit around the bone and its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one method is that you excise the bone with narrow forceps, and this is the shape of it: And then apply another excisor slightly wider than the first; and this is the shape of it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	Then administer myrrh to cleanse the pus that remains.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is necessary for you to have various scalpels, some of which are used for discharging pus more effectively than others; and some are sharper at their tips than the others, and they should be made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in tapping on the scalpels so that you do not injure the head and the patient.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is hard and strong, it is necessary to drill around it before you use the scalpels, which are called non-penetrating forceps.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are called this because these forceps do not reach the bone of the skull to the point where it is adjacent to the head, as their tip is rounded or has a margin above it resembling a small border or circle, which prevents them from penetrating beyond the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is convenient for you to have many of these forceps, each of which should be suitable for the thickness of different bones, so that at your disposal there are various types covering the entire skull, with one end being sharp and the length and width varying according to the thickness of the bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the method for three types of forceps: The quality of perforating around a broken bone is that you place the forceps on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the forceps to another location, and continue this process throughout the extent of the thickness of the shaft or similar areas.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	From the incision of the knife that is between each tract of the bone, and apply that poultice as finely as you can according to its lightness, as we have said, until you remove the bone, or with your hand, or by any other cause through some instruments which you have prepared for this, such as towels and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And you must ensure with all caution that the knife does not touch any part of the wound.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when you have circled the perforated bone, it will be separated from the wound if it is continuous at that point, and you will extract it; you must rasp and smooth that in the roughness of where it is in the bone with an instrument similar to a knife, but it must be thinner and finer than other knives.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any part of the small and fragile bones breaks, now take that with ease according to what you need from the instruments; and then treat the wound with lint and ointments which we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is light, distant from fear, which Guillaume and the laureate praise greatly; and this is the speech about it: It is necessary for you at the beginning to start uncovering the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most severe and obvious, until when you have uncovered that part and you have paused below it with the extremity of this slow and cheerful knife, whose form is as follows:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the lens-shaped part is firm and no part is cut, and the sharp part is made into two flaps forward along its length, as you see; that the lens-shaped part be fitted to the wound with the incision side sharp in the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	Here is the translation:
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	In such cases if there is any cause attached to the bone of the abdomen in some places of bone, cut with that part of the scalpel which has a lens-shaped edge, and deliver what can be delivered easily, for it is delivered without harm or fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the abdomen, and that which is abscised or remains of the bone is its surface, and it remains in roughness and small projections, then you should scrape off that roughness and eradicate those projections with fine razors which you have prepared in various quantities so that it may be possible for you to administer those most suitable places and most appropriately according to where your operation on the broken bone leads you and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you should administer in your proportion with which you scrape the bone at the beginning with the broadest of those razors, and gradually use one that is finer and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the thinnest and finest of all of them.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But in each of the other small, fine fractures and subtle fractures, you should administer care according to what leads you towards the correction of them.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is because they are not afraid about all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And stand on what we have written regarding large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the abdomen is swollen when you eradicate the bone, then take a piece of cloth according to the size of the wound, and immerse it in boiled oil, and place that on the wound's opening; and then take another folded or triple-layered cloth and immerse it in vinegar and boiled oil, and place that over the first cloth; and do this as lightly as possible so as not to press down hard on the swelling; and then apply a broad bandage over it, but do not tighten it beyond what is necessary for the wound.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	If you are certain that this cure should be applied for one day or two before you are sure of an abscess being cauterized; and then untie it and promptly administer medicines with which excessive dryness is superfluous, such as lint and flour of oats, and powder of iris and artemisia, and similar to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	It is that you should make these medicines into powder which should be finely ground like those that are dry; and generally, administer everything to it whose property is to cleanse without irritating.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And guard according to your virtue that the plague in your cure be clean; and let it not be in the ignorance of handling or otherwise; nor should you allow its virulence to increase. For when it is adjusted upon the pannicle of the brain, it corrupts that and ruins it, and the malady will quickly turn malignant thereafter.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it affects the top of the head, as the bone is cleansed there and especially when the cure is improperly applied, and a blackness appears on its surface; and therefore consider if the malady presents the symptoms we have mentioned, know that it is dangerous without any doubt.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is not blackness but the medicine that is applied above which causes it, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of olive oil, and use them to moisten a piece of linen, and then apply that to the top of the head; and promptly cure it with appropriate medicinal spices until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is cut.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken except in two main places, or one of several possible areas, because there are two bones there, since the lower part is cartilaginous, and it is not broken, but only bruised, swollen, and disfigured.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two main parts is broken, then you should insert your little finger into the nasal cavity, and manipulate that fracture from within with your index finger, and from without with your thumb, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this with ease, and be careful that your operation does not cause the patient pain.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then you should equalize at the end of the bone where there is a small swelling.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should proceed as described.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And try to restore it on the first day of the fracture if possible; otherwise, wait until the seventh or tenth day when the swelling has subsided.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And after that, insert at the end of the nose a pad of linen cloth if the fracture is in one place, or use two pads if the fracture is in two places, and let the pad be thick enough to fill the cavity of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient restorers say that the pads should be soaked in honey and changed every day, but I have not seen this necessary; instead, it is best to soak the pad in albumen of a cooked egg mixed with powder; and then leave the pad in place until the bone is firm and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	In some cases, insert into the nose, instead of a sponge, a piece of cloth made into a ball wrapped in lion's skin; and let it be that with such force has the fracture of the nose occurred that the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, use sponges.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another swelling occurs that needs to be cauterized, apply a plaster to the nose with pitch or wax mixed with vinegar and rose oil, or with aqua regia.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if no swelling occurs that needs to be cauterized, now you should apply a plaster over it with sesame flour and powdered eggshell mixed with egg white; and then place it on the lion's skin, and do not cover the nose with any other cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or comminuted, now you should cut around them, and extract them with instruments that are suitable for this; and then close the wound, and treat it with substances that promote healing and consolidation, and with plasters appropriate for this.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if you encounter an internal swelling of the nose, now you should treat it with sponges and administer lead tubes inside until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the lower jaw is broken and there is no swelling around the fracture, now observe if the fracture is only on the outside, and it is not broken into two parts and curved inward, then its diagnosis is easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	If the fracture is on the right side, place your left finger in the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left side, then use your right finger; and press against the swelling of the fracture from within with ease to the outer parts, with your other hand from the outer part of the bone; do this gently.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then it is necessary to apply extension from both sides as much as possible to achieve proper alignment.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a disruption with the teeth, then strengthen those that you expect will break with a thread of gold or silver or silk; and place on the broken jaw a piece of cloth soaked in cerot, and then place on it a folded cloth, and place on it a large piece of soft cloth cut appropriately, or a pad of dough equal to the length of the jaw; and bind this above according to how you have prepared the bandage for it and as is convenient for its application, so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to use rest and calm, and give him food in the form of thin soups.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you find that the shape has already been altered in some way, then you should change and loosen it on the third day; and then correct what is already altered of it with a plaster made from powdered linseed, egg albumen, or ground chickpeas, after having removed the cerot, and place over the plaster a thin layer of linen.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then as you place and adjust the plaster on it, if the position of the bone is not altered, leave it so that you do not loosen it until it is healed and the fracture has strengthened; for this fracture typically becomes strong in about three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another abscess occurs that requires cauterization, then administer what we have said for other similar cases in the treatment of it until it is healed, and let that abscess be treated accordingly.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is a compound fracture, now consider whether the bone fragment is displaced or not; then use your skill to extract those fragments with what is appropriate for their removal using the instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the wound is narrow, now enlarge it with a scalpel according to the amount that you deem necessary.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have extracted those fragments that need to be removed, if the wound opening is wide, then close it; and if not, apply one of the plasters appropriate for this condition until it heals.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	There are various ways the collarbone can be broken in front of the muscle, and this fracture occurs in one of three manners.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	For it may be broken, or displaced, or separated into two parts without any fragments being displaced; and this is easier for its restoration. Or it may be such that fragments are displaced within it, making its restoration difficult. Or it may be such that the fracture is a compound fracture.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the procedure in such a case, when the fracture is a compound fracture, is that you have two assistants present, so that one holds an instrument and stabilizes the broken collarbone, and the other extends the arm over that area.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	To set the fracture, apply the splints in such a way that the shape is made according to what is necessary, and let there not be too much prominence or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then it is necessary to place under the armpit of the injured side a ball made of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to your requirement; extend and elevate the shoulder and compress the ball with your hand so that you set the fracture as needed.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the end of the shoulder blade to the outer parts, so that it reaches its proper place, then it is necessary for the patient to be reclined on his back, and you should place something under the muscle on one side, about halfway in size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant should press the muscle on the lower parts so that the bone of the shoulder blade is elevated to its proper place, and then you should correct the fracture and set it with the splints mentioned.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel splinters of the shoulder blade and small pieces, then it is necessary to cut them out and remove those splinters with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is stuck in the bone, then you should devise an incision with one of the instruments that you have prepared for this purpose, after placing under the shoulder blade the instrument used by the surgeon; and this tool is made of wood or iron and has the following form:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it resembles the bottom of a bowl, with its concave shape; and its width should be according to your need for it, depending on the size of the bone or its smallness.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	Make it as long as is appropriate for the operation; let it have two ends, just as you wish, and one end be broad and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound which you incised when you extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and you are sure it will form an abscess, then you now adjust the two lips of the wound with a suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear it may form an abscess soon, then you should employ the wound with dressings and powders according to the quantity of the wound's disruption.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess forms soon, then insert a dressing soaked in vinegar and rose water, and place it over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	And when the stricture of the bone when it is in the wound and its section requires it, place a plaster made from flour mixed with egg white over the padding of linen, and then place the sphere beneath the head if you need it. Next, take cotton, which Saracens call "torca," that is about one palm wide and as long as necessary; then place double powders on top of the padding and the plaster. Take a thin board with a width of three fingers and a similar length, wrap it in linen, and secure this bandage over the area above the fracture site. Then apply more cotton as needed, roll it around the neck and under the head and armpit, and adjust it to cover all parts. When you see that the stricture of the fracture is aligned properly, then your work is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And do not let the splint be loose over the broken bone; and therefore it is necessary that you see the patient every day, so when the bandaging has softened or you see the splint already loosened, then you should correct this and tighten the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And place the patient's pillow over their neck, and below it place some bolsters so that during sleep the head is raised slightly; therefore raise the support from the side of the injury, and thus elevate the collarbone fracture with the muscle elevation; or bind the arm to the neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the bandage unless it is necessary due to an abscess, after twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you see that the face of it needs it, and adjust in the constriction and restore it, and leave it until it is restored and the collarbone fracture is set.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the method in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some people it is done in less time.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The collarbone is broken in the middle part and not at the ends, only the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when it is broken at that location — and it is broken in the middle part — and it is known only by palpation, then according to the shape of the fracture, prepare yourself and reduce it according to its natural shape in every way that is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And thus place on the wound powder of ground egg whites and rose petals; and next place a double-layered cloth pad; and then place over it, according to the quantity of the spoon, all or at least a little bit, of the lotion.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	And if the lotion leaves behind cavities in some places according to the spoon, then you fill those cavities with lint pads, and then apply the lotion evenly.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then secure above with a bandage made of linen strips, applying it with sufficient firmness to hold the lotion in place without moving it from its location.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And examine the bandage each day; and whenever it needs to be loosened, change it and tighten it evenly if the lotion has moved from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And apply the medication on its proper side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spoon is restored in xx days or in .xxv. 
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	When this number is complete, then you loosen the bandage, and know for certain that those bones from which there was no fear of their beginning are dissolved.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed to the place of the bone piece and place the ligature below it, then you cut above it, remove it, and do as we have said regarding the fracture of the clavicle or suppuration caused by a cauterization should this happen.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of foot fractures.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot sometimes is broken in the middle and remains immobile; however, its extremities move as cicadas do, moving slightly and repeatedly.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And the symptoms when the middle of it is broken are that it tilts towards the inner parts and there is great pain, difficulty in movement, coughing, shortness of breath, and vomiting blood; and a cavity forms in the broken bone and this is not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient should lie supine on their back, and place a bolster between their shoulders; then gently press the muscles, and adjust the ribs using more than two fingers, and carefully proceed with the operation and alignment in every possible manner suitable for this, until the figure of the bone returns as required.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place on it a plaster and wool, and put under a delicate wooden splint or a similar light material, then wrap that in cloth; and then carefully bind it over the broken bone without pressing too hard; and proceed with bandaging around the back several times, and tighten that binding appropriately; and then examine the bandage at all times, and when it has loosened, tighten it again.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity compels the removal of that which has been corroded or protruded or caused pain or an abscess in that place, then cut and loosen that which is there and remove the plaster and correct what has happened by this method of treatment; and immediately apply the plaster again if you wish to do so; and adjust the stricture until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that the fracture of ribs does not occur except in places where they join together; and at their extremities near the front, there is no breakage of those parts because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the feeling of those parts during the examination of them.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that it equalizes the fracture according to the possible method, until it heals as necessary, and then apply plaster and bind the broken bone with a splint if that is needed.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs inclines towards the inner parts, then severe pain and piercing sensation occur, as in the case of someone who has wept, because the bone punctures the membrane; and breathing difficulties, coughing, and vomiting of blood may also happen; and this is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the Ancients were skilled in that with powerful methods.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And what they say is: it is necessary to pause from foods that produce inflammation and gas, so that the belly becomes inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed outward.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	Let us proceed with what will not be a cause for easily generating an inflamed abscess if it does not occur; and if it has already occurred, now help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them say that it should be placed above the wound and close to where it is drawn strongly; and this is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the wound will draw the superfluities to the place due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them say: let the place be covered with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and let powders be placed between the ribs until it is full, so that the bandage wraps around as closely to that roundness; and then treat the illness with the cure for pleurisy using food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the illness is caused by violent constraint that cannot be tolerated, and the bone pushes through the membrane at a puncture point, we fear for the condition; now it should be that we cut above the location, expose the broken rib, and then place over it an instrument to secure the incision previously prepared, and that they cut the bone with ease, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then we adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitching, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs internally, now you should apply heat and infuse powders in reddened oil and place it on the area, and treat the illness with what is appropriate for an internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let them lie supine on the side on which they sleep until they are healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the second vertebra and the neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	In some cases, fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and similarly in the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, at that moment consider the following: if you see their fingers already softened, numb, and lifeless, unable to move them or stretch them, and when you press on them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle and there is no feeling of pain in them, then you know that they will not recover, and in most cases it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they can move them and feel constriction when pressed on and pricked, then you know that the vertebra is safe and that the patient will recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if the vertebrae of the neck are similar to this condition and you want to know if they will recover or not, then at that moment consider their breathing.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If you see that they are already weakened, the same applies to them as it would to their limbs. Soon after lying on their back, they experience vomiting and involuntary diarrhea, and sometimes when lying on their back, they want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is fatal, and at that point, there is no need to work on treating them.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of those symptoms occur, the cause is better and less dangerous.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for them is to apply poultices to reduce the swelling on the affected vertebra with olive oil or boiled honey; place this on that area several times a day until the swelling subsides.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	During the hours of rest, one of the soothing and beneficial plasters should be applied, and it should be wrapped with a bandage; and order the patient to use repose and tranquility and not to sleep on the side where pain is felt until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that the flesh around the bone becomes detached or for any cause that it is separated from it, then you should cover it and hold the bone; and immediately join the two edges of the wound, with sutures if necessary; and afterwards treat it with some incarnative ointment until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the end of the bone is broken and it is the tip of the bone, then you should insert your fingers into the buttock with your left hand, and align the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible by second-degree reduction; and afterwards apply a plaster and splint, if necessary, and wrap it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel detached and broken flesh in it, then you should act on that, remove it, and treat the wound with the treatment that is prescribed until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the broad (or wide) area.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the broad areas are often broken, and when they break, the fracture does not extend beyond their extremities but rather is incised along their length and deviates to the sides; this causes pain in the affected area and puncture sensations, and movement is impaired when fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you should place your hand on it so that it extends over the fracture in a manner that corresponds to its figure.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is at the extremity of the limb, then you should align it according to what seems appropriate to you so that it resembles its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	And if the fracture is in the long bone that inclines toward the lower parts, then you should have the patient lie on their belly so that you can prepare the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have aligned it, apply a plaster over it, and then place a splint of wood or cane beside it, and bind it tightly with bandages in such a way that you do not fear any displacement of the fracture or movement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And align the concavity so that it fills appropriately, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side so that it maintains alignment properly.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	And if an abscess occurs suddenly, then you should stop the extension and restoration of it until the abscess is treated, and apply what is appropriate for that condition as it has been done before; and afterward return to the restoration of it, and bind it as is necessary.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if the bones are displaced or crushed, then you should treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the wrist.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjutori is what is between the shoulder blade and the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is fractured, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which is that you take a flat piece of wood of moderate thickness in this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	Let there be two ends of bandages, and let it be suspended from an elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Place the patient on a board; then lay the broken arm outside onto the stick until it reaches the midpoint where the curve of the stick is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend something heavy from it, or have the patient extend it downward with their own strength; and then the physician should bring the fracture back to its proper position, as needed.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And another method is to have the patient lie on their back with their neck raised and suspend the head by the neck with bandages; then instruct two assistants, one of whom holds above the fracture near it, and the other below the patient, each pulling in their own direction.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then apply bandages over the fracture on one side and over the other side with another bandage, and have each of the two assistants pull in their respective directions.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then it is necessary to place half of the bandage over the knot and the other part below the fracture towards the joint.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is near the joint, then it is necessary to place the bandage over that location and around the joint.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Tie it in such a way that it is comfortable and easy to work with; then when it is tied appropriately as needed and applied properly, tighten it if no inflammation or abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If an abscess occurs after cauterization, if there is no constriction within seven days, then place a linen strip soaked in vinegar and rose oil so that the abscess can rest, and then tighten it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method of tightening that is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then place a wrapping of wet cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm on that support, and place its hand on its own muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and tighten over the support for the arm so that the arm is in a fixed position, if there is no cause from the broken bone prohibiting this.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And now use a splint.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you place on the fracture that splint which is thicker and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break plus an addition of three fingers from all sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then tighten over the splints with the bandage which I have described at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your bandage over the site of the fracture be tighter there.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And the farther apart the fracture is, the looser the bandaging should be.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so if you position the splints and the bandaging as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its proper position, then do it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess after cauterization, then leave the bandaging and the splints for seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Therefore, consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that no pus or inflammation occurs; or it is forbidden for food to reach the member due to excess fluid retention or constriction; and thus correct everything as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not loosen the bandage for at least three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient lie on their back, and their head should be raised slightly to rest above their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place a pad filled with wool on the injured area, and at all times of the night or day, ensure that the shape of the broken limb is not loosened or dissolved, nor should the bandage be too loose; thus, correct this all with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And give the patient food according to the order we mentioned earlier, such that the food is light at first until healing begins; then it should be gradually made heavier.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	For the custom of the bandage and changing it is that they be tight for forty days; then they should be loosened, a bath should be given, and medicine applied with substances that correct this.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is still rough and rubbing against itself, then do not loosen the bandage, and keep the splints in place for one day or up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the Restoration of a Fractured Arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and radius; one is small and lies under the little finger, while the other is larger and is situated below the smaller one, towards the thumb side.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	If only the larger bone or the smaller one is broken, and firmly set together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller bone above is broken, its restoration is easy, and its healing is quicker.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the bone below is broken, the fracture is severe, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse still is when two bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller one above, it is appropriate for the surgeon, due to its restoration, to allow a brief extension period with ease until it becomes level.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the larger bone is the one that is broken, then a more vigorous extension period should be allowed.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are broken together, then it is necessary to allow an even more vigorous extension period.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And it is necessary to place the figure of the hand due to its restoration and extension spread out on a board, with the wrist above all the fingers, such that the thumb is higher than the other fingers, and the little finger is lower than the others, lying flat on a sloped surface.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And there should be a board in front of it at an appropriate height or straight ahead, so that the little finger does not have to work.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And one assistant should extend the arm from below with the patient's hand or with a sling, and another assistant should extend it from above similarly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And the surgeon should then place the bone in such a way that it assumes the best shape possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the treatment of the bone you encounter difficulties, then at this point you should try to reduce all parts to their proper place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if a separate difficulty appears that makes the condition worse and is not to your hope for its restoration, then you should act upon it and remove that part according to the method we have mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is due to plague, I have already treated that in a separate chapter, so follow the treatment described there.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with cerot made from rose oil and white wax, which should be between thickness and subtlety, and place a strong cloth over it with fine stitching so that the abscess can subside; and then remove the cerot and apply a plaster prepared from powdered mallow in hound’s tongue juice, and afterwards place poultices; and let the poultice placed over that fracture be more distant and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of poultices for the arm varies in major treatments, or rather, whether the fracture is in one bone or in two bones together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your stitching over the location of the fracture more firmly and vigorously, and when it is most necessary to apply compression above the fracture or below it, place the stitches slightly looser according to how it was described at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be soft and moistened cloths, not hard or rough, and the thread with which they are sewn should be of medium thickness between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and the bandaging for some days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, as quickly as possible after such an occurrence to the limb, you should bathe the limb with hot water until that condition subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And do not force the limb until it rests, and then return to the binding.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the bandaging has already been loosened and the bone is already set and appears to be in place, then correct everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider whether the nutrition is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive bandaging, for then you should loosen that a little and leave it for some days until nutrition reaches it, and then strengthen that.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if the patient does not suffer from any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to loosen it for about 20 days or thereabouts.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then let the patient's arm be suspended by their own skill of active movement, and make them lie down on their back to sleep.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in about 30 days or 32 days, or sometimes it may be restored in 28 days, and all of this depends on the condition of the tissues and the strength of the patient.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of a fracture of the wrist and the fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that at the wrist and the joints of the fingers, when there is a fracture, it usually heals in about two months.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	When it happens that the arm is fractured or dislocated, at that time it is necessary for the patient to lie flat and facing upwards according to equality, and place the arm above in such an extended position.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the minister should extend the broken bones and the physician should adjust them until they are properly set.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And now it is necessary to apply a plaster and cotton, unless an abscess occurs, in which case cauterize; and then place a splint above according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that part in linen.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the fracture is in the parts inside the palm of the hand, now make an appearance of a sphere with cloth, and command the patient to hold that with their fractured palm; then bind it tightly with cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the splint be made of wood and wrapped in cloth in which it is raised, so that the wood fits against the palm; and bind it as necessary.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	But if the fracture is in the parts outside, now it is necessary to place a splint above and another splint below on the palm, so that the arm is supported and straight; and then apply the bandage, as you would wrap the arm at the wrist with linen.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if there is a fracture in one of the bones of the fingers, now if it is a thumb, adjust it as necessary and then bind it to the palm; and if you wish, place a small straight splint so that the fracture is elevated and not worsened.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	But if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as in the middle finger, or the ring finger, or the little finger, now it should be adjusted and bandaged to its corresponding finger; or all should be bound together continuously, which is better; or place a small splint on that finger, as we have said for the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and approach that, the disposition of abscesses cut and opposed — both the hand operation — both with what is needed when some cause of those occurs, as it is repeated the narration of them.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of a fracture of the collarbone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The collarbone is often fractured and is felt according to how it has shifted forward and upward.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done in such a way that one bandage is stretched over the fracture and another bandage below the fracture, and the patient lies face down on their belly.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And the practitioner should extend all the bandages to their proper position according to the quality when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is closer to the shoulder joint, then the bandage should be placed close to the armpit at that part, so that the extension can take place there, and the other bandage below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the fracture is closer to the neck, then the bandage should be placed close to the neck, and the extension should take place at the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And the physician should align the bone with both of his hands until it is reduced according to its natural appearance and the bone is joined by proper union; then it is necessary to apply plaster and bandaging, unless an abscess occurs in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if an abscess does occur, then you should leave it alone for several days until the abscess has subsided, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The binding of the splint should be done as follows: wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, and fold it two or three times, and trim off the excess; then bind the pad so that it reaches to the ankle and to the base of the foot.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a strip of cloth between the skin and the pad near the end towards the bottom, so that the ends of the cloth extend beyond both sides of the pad, and then wrap around the pad and the limb whatever excess remains of the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place over the limb at the site of the fracture splints, and place one strip over the bone of the pad.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the spaces between the pad and the limb with soft cloths, so that the binding is snug.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin the binding tightly on top at the site of the fracture with three or four turns, and as you move away from the area of the fracture with the bandage, your binding should be looser and lighter and softer.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two ends of the strip towards the bottom until it reaches the ankle, and tie both ends of the splints from the other side so that the bandage does not come loose from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then leave the binding in place, so that it does not cause corrosion, abscess, swelling, or similar issues to the limb; and if any such causes occur, then undo part of it and correct whatever has occurred as soon as possible, as we have said before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If there is pus in the bone which must be removed, then you should scrape that thoroughly as much as possible; and if not, open it up and remove what can be reached, and treat with whatever remedy precedes until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And in some cases, this fracture of the skull is strengthened by these bandages that are attached to it, as we have said about the auxiliary and the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of the limb in such a manner made, no bad limping occurs to the patient; and if it is restored alone, or that which is applied to the other side, then it is necessary that the person limp for some time.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the skull is strengthened in forty days or a few more days, and all of this depends on the diversity of constitutions and other conditions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the thumb bone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the fracture of the thumb bone tends to happen at the tip, but it also occurs in other places frequently.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	However, if there is a fracture, it is often merely a crack or contusion in its parts, and this is either one pain or several pains, and all of this depends on the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is such that it should be scraped and joined back together its broken parts as described, until it is aggregated and conjoined as much as possible by equality, ease, and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply a plaster and place over it a round bandage if needed; and strengthen it above with proper compression.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And so consider all the positions which we have recommended for other fractures, as well as abscesses and similar conditions, in such a way that they are appropriate to every event and suitable to what is necessary within them until they are healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the fracture of the hip.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the hip there are two bones, one of which is thick and is called the hip bone; the other is slender and is called the femur.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And accidents of certain types of fracture occur to both bones as happen to the two bones of the arm, and thus restoration is performed on it similarly to the restoration of the arm, and the operation for it is the same.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if two bones are broken, the hip is affected in all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the more slender bone is broken, the hip is affected in the forward parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the thicker bone is broken, you will find it below, and it is of those causes that are not within your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension and reduction and fixation of the fragments accordingly.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, be careful if the fracture of the hip is severe and has many stages, that the extension be less and more gradual, and proceed with caution according to your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the case of the hip, there is a reason to operate as you would on the arm, which is when you equalize the fragments and complete the entire procedure. At this time, you will take pieces of wood from plants that grow near causes that are smooth and not thorny; choose those with small grooves, and they should not be from thorny varieties. The length should be according to the length of the hip, and the thickness should be proportionate to what is below.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And wrap each cloth in two coverings according to its length, and place one at the convex part of one side and the other at the concave part of the other side, and let it be tied into the deepest part of the wound.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And tie the two rods in three places at both ends and at the middle point, for with this structure the arch is prevented from leaning to the right or left, and it stands in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a piece of wood has already been administered according to the length of the arch; and place the arch so that it maintains its mobility.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And especially do this in the case of a fracture, and when it is properly a condition requiring such treatment.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And every day consider the arch and study it carefully based on previous studies, and you must guard it from abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any such cause arises, then act accordingly until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the heel and of the bones of the foot and of the aforementioned.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	A complete fracture does not often occur in the heel; but fractures can happen occasionally in the bones of the foot; and among those of the foot, few suffer fractures, and they rarely experience anything more than strain due to their disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot suffer a fracture and these bones are elevated above their natural position, then the patient should rest his foot on prepared ground as described.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then place something on top of that which is raised from those bones, and press down on them, and bind them so that they return to their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply a plaster above it and place something above that, and below the chest of the patient place a small table with two flat surfaces.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen that limb with a proper structure, since you have wrapped it in cloths and other materials as needed.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And as three or four days pass, then you loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones bound, either joined together or dislocated, and the treatment in such cases is as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some say they are joined together, then you should restore them and bind them as I recommend to you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place a splint under the joined finger according to the length of the finger, and leave some space around it; and below the patient place the table as recommended to you, and strengthen it with proper support.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if what is joined together involves two or three or more bones, then you should place a splint of appropriate size wrapped in linen cloth on each finger, and strengthen the table at the base of the patient’s body so that it rests on one of the flat surfaces of the table for proper support across the chest.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you not to forget that you should consider all the causes mentioned to you in the treatment of other fractures and accidents that we have discussed; and prepare yourself for every condition with what is necessary.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter Eighteen.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the fracture of the skull of a woman and of the bone of the penis and of the virile member of a man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the skull of a woman is fractured, at that time make that incision in the area where it has occurred, and then slightly incline it towards the part of the back.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife should fill the skull with cotton, and it should be done in such a way that it conforms to the shape of the head; and then the woman should be bandaged, and her back slightly elevated little by little, because all this is done so that before the fracture site, it remains as it was and the fractured bone returns to its place.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place poultices on her back, and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton to facilitate it, and after she urinates, reduce and return that as per the method by which you mixed it at the beginning, and then return to her initial poultice.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around that time, because it takes that long to restore.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and sew onto it a tube made of cane; then insert the entire bladder into the skull fracture site, and then blow air through the tube until the bladder is inflated inside the head, because this helps the fracture to return to its proper position.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then fill it with cotton and keep it for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the penis in a man or woman is fractured, at that time administer for its restoration and alignment what we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	In what is true and not hidden in these nearby fractures that rarely occur, especially for one who has some study and use and understands my book; for that fracture signifies to you in the major dispositions by the true method in the restoration and in the tightening of it, and thus understands well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	In the penis of the man when it is grasped, take a bandage made of cloth, and put the penis in that; then place around it a wrapping of cloth, and let it be wrapped up, and afterwards let it be left for three days or about that time, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of bone fractures when they are inflamed.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is appropriate for one to whom it happens that there is a fracture with inflammation, and especially if the bone is large like the bone of the thigh or the humerus, or similar to those, that you treat and bleed them immediately if the conditions for bleeding indicate this as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the inflammation causes bleeding, now it is appropriate that you treat for retention of it by such means as you powder on it finely powdered eggshell, if no other cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess forms suddenly, now you should delay the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third and fourth days thereafter, for you will cause harmful accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If a broken bone protrudes above the joint and is visible, you should proceed to reduce it and align it with ease and minimal extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If extension is not within your capability and the alignment requires more than what you have, then you should reduce it with these tools; and this tool is made of iron, its length being seven or eight digits, and its width according to the size of the wound; and therefore it is necessary for the surgeon to take three or four such tools, depending on what is needed for various types of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be round, and slightly thickened so that it does not bend due to the pressure on it during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have a sharp tip at which there is a margin on both ends; and the upper part should be thicker, while the middle part should taper towards the sides.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called in Greek "labrum volentz atelarem," which means a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the end of it can be placed steadily with the tip raised above the protruding end of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And press it in one motion until the bone returns to its place and is aligned with some degree of alignment.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And thus strive to align the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken end is delicate and does not hold the tool well, then you should insert the end of that bone so that the instrument has a good grip on it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot reduce the bone with what we have recommended, then now use that with what is suitable for the knives which we have mentioned; or saw that with one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And remove that which remains in the bone of roughness and small scratches.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction the patient still suffers from severe pain in the tooth, then you will know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then do what you consider will be of great benefit to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the bone is complete, then soak a cloth in black styptic wine, and do this properly even in summer, and do not place cerot or any other substance containing oil on the wound, so that it does not cause rotting and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer poultices at the appropriate time for your completion of the bone's restoration, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can cut away any protruding parts with forceps and use dressings according to the extent of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be careful not to touch the wound at the fracture, for many times unskilled doctors have done this, and it has caused death or incurable illness or severe harm to their patients.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the swelling is slight, soft, and different from the swelling of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or it is a bad wound, and you fear some of the accidents we have mentioned, and you feel pain in that area, then do not use poultices on it, but instead apply a dressing made of hard cloths rather than poultices and treat it accordingly.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when one or two days have passed since the wound began to heal, whereupon granulation has started to form, then you remove the cloth that you had placed over it, and immediately apply bandages, using those which according to our custom are used for treating wounds, such as tetradecphas and similar ones to this.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is necessary for you to untie the bandage and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and it should be such that the member is prepared in such a way that the pus can drain from it downwards with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If several days have passed since the wound began and it has not consolidated nor has the granulation tissue formed, then you should know that here there is a delay due to small issues, for which you must examine the wound with a probe.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those delays, those that are separate should be removed and extracted, while those that cannot be separated and cause pain when the member is moved, you should proceed to incise them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the wound becomes infected with gangrene or erysipelas, or any other type of corruption and putrefaction, then you should proceed according to one of those methods mentioned in the preceding chapter on the treatment of such conditions.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And regarding this matter in which you must be cautious and present your best judgment: when a large bone is broken, treat the limb as you would the bones of the wrist and forearm and similar ones, and do not attempt traction or extraction if doing so might lead to death after four attempts; leave it inside for pus to drain, as it will likely fall out on its own within twenty or thirty days; and then attend to the wound if it is visible, otherwise leave it be.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of joint stiffness that occurs as a consequence of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	This stiffness often occurs in the joints during the healing of a fracture, especially near the joints themselves, and it distorts the shape of the limb; and it greatly prevents the limb from performing its natural functions.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider whether the stiffness is recent and administer medicines that have a binding effect such as aloes, henbane, wormwood, squill, colocynth, and similar ones; take any of these individually or in combination. Confess (administer) them either by mouth with vinegar, or with egg white, or mixed with water, and apply it to the stiffness on linen, and bind it tightly with proper compression.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And let the compression remain for several days without loosening it; then loosen it and reapply another one until the stiffness is alleviated; or apply a thin sheet of lead over it gradually, as lead has the property of reducing inflammation in limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the stiffness has already turned to bone and is causing severe pain, necessitating its removal urgently, then cut it at the part that is most affected, and excise the excess or reduce it with some instruments until it is alleviated; and care for it until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of a fracture when it is set and subsequently the limb becomes weak and does not follow its natural course.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is set, and subsequently the limb becomes weak and frail, this happens for several reasons: one reason is excessive dissolution of bandages and binding done improperly; or due to overly tight compression preventing nourishment from reaching the limb; or due to an excess of unnecessary applications; or due to premature movement not at the appropriate time; or due to a lack of blood in the patient's body and weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	For the treatment, give food to the patient and make his heart tender so that the blood multiplies in him; administer baths; and apply cautery and cupping to him.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And apply plasters to the limb, so that the plaster attracts nourishment; or continue rubbing with cold water, until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of broken bones when they have healed incorrectly and prohibit further operation on them.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens that a limb already restored near its healing shows curvature and prominence in the broken bone and knotting, and this is due to the deformation of the shape of the limb; however, since the limb is not prohibited from its natural movement, you should not accept the word of one who believes that member to be newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But there are indeed false physicians and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is a reprehensible one, leading to great fear, the sign of which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if the limping and knotting are recent, then it is necessary to rub them with cold water in which soft herbs are soaked, such as flax seeds and radish roots, and melilot, and similar ones; and a soft plaster should be applied as well, made properly for this purpose; or take mucilage from radish seeds and mix it with flour of linseed or olive oil, then apply it; or grind fat figs with dove’s milk, and similar medicines to those mentioned for consolidating.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	In some cases, it is dissolved by constant gentle friction which is applied to the most humid parts, and movement of the member should be administered to all parts at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the tortuosity has already advanced and has become hard and converted into stone, and it has caused the need for treatment with iron, then it is necessary to let the pus above drain out and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and to excise what is superfluous from the knotting of that material with the bone with subtle instruments, and facilitate this under careful attention and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On the treatment of dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of any of the joints from its proper place, by which it is prohibited from movement, and the figure of the member is distorted, causing severe pain and great injuries.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	When a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to attempt its reduction as soon as possible and not delay in reducing it, for if it is delayed, the joint becomes inflamed and hard, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, it is not advisable to move or extend the limb during the period of inflammation, as movement often causes spasm and severe pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when this happens, it is necessary to prepare for the puncture of the abscess, and allow the limb to rest until the inflammation subsides; then bathe the member with warm water and oil, and subsequently reduce it with care.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And treat the entire limb with what will help it remember its proper place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	Here are the bones set in order as previously described for fractures; I now enter into the part dealing with lesser wounds.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIIIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So when both jaws are dislocated and do not function; the dislocation of both can be done in one of two ways: either they are partially removed from their positions with slight movement, and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated and fully displaced, to the point where they are softened at the joint where saliva flows, and where he cannot hold anything nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped around his words.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But when the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its proper position on its own with little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is complete and full, it must be reduced immediately, and should not be delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the minister hold the head of the patient, and the physician insert his thumb into the root of the dislocated jaw inside the mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers should be outside equally; and orders the patient to cease moving their jaws and relax them on each side; and the physician then guides the jaw back into place until it returns to its proper position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated together, then administer a warm mixture of water and oil to ease the reduction of both, and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And so when returning and using bandages, and the mouth of the wound is closed and not softened, at that time pause on those powders of cloth with wax, and let it be made of wax and rubbed oil; and then let it be applied with ease to the soft parts.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be placed between his two ears, so that it does not turn to the right or left; and do not force him to chew for any reason; let his food be given in liquid form until such time as when the pains have subsided and his jaws are loosened, then allow him to eat what he wishes.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth for eating and drinking and other uses until such time as the jaw is loosened and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of both jaws when they are dislocated at any time and not returned to their places is difficult, then fevers often occur with frequent sweat, and easily the patient's belly becomes swollen, and easily vomiting of pure bile occurs.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then you know that it is hopeless; and often the one to whom this happens dies within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The clavicle is not dislocated from the chest inward towards the body; and sometimes it is dislocated outward, and this can be felt.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And for the restoration of the hand, the patient lies on his back and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then press the area with your palm firmly, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then apply the plaster and powder to that area.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the extremity of that which joins the spine and is continuous with it does not become dislocated in any day; therefore, it must be reduced and bandaged as we have said and according to how you have prepared it.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the plaster, powder, and bandage, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the Reduction of Muscle Dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the upper part to the lower part.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and this happens slowly; and it does not become dislocated at the rear parts by the shoulder; and it does not become dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is most often dislocated and protruded at the lower parts below the joint, and more particularly in those whose flesh is thin, it easily becomes dislocated; but in those with thick muscles, it protrudes with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	If it happens that any person is struck or falls and the muscle of the place becomes swollen with swelling, and it is treated with what has already been displaced.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then proceed with that which you have placed upon it, and now proceed with the treatment of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of it is known when it is in the lower parts away from the tendon; therefore, distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal muscle, for you will notice clear differences among them; you will find a concavity at the head of the muscle and below the tendon there is contact with the head of the muscle as if by someone, and the injured person cannot move their hand to their ear, nor can they use that limb in any movement.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated from the feet or above, then you will immediately notice a clear touch, and it is not concealed.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And this dislocation is gently reduced when it is fresh and the injured person is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the practitioner raises the hand of the injured above the parts; then he places his fingers below the tendon and elevates the joint with strength to its proper place, and the practitioner raises the hand of the injured, and extends it properly; then he holds it still as it returns gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return as we have said and after several days from the beginning of the dislocation, then the injured person should be bathed in hot water and administered a lotion to soften and smooth it as if for burns, using fenugreek, melilot in water, and it should be applied.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Let the patient lie supine on their back and place under them a pillow of wool that is even between softness and firmness. Then the surgeon places his hand on the sphere and lifts the muscle upward, and holds the patient's arm so it is not injured in the process, and another assistant should hold the patient’s head so it is not turned to either side, for it immediately returns to its position.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce that second in this manner: have present a man who is taller than the patient and station him on the side of that flank. Insert your hand under the patient’s muscle below the swelling and lift the swelling up toward the head so the patient is suspended in air, and another assistant should hold the patient's arm from behind their abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is light, then it is necessary to have something else by which they can be suspended, so that the weight will hold them firmly, for the dislocation returns immediately otherwise.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in this other manner: drive a long pole into the ground with its top rounded like a pestle’s head, neither too thick nor too thin. Place the patient below and have them stand along the length of the pole. Then extend one arm to the side opposite the pole, and firmly extend the rest of their body; the joint will quickly return to its place.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction of it is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this treatment: take a pole whose length is two yards, width four fingers, and thickness gradually tapering according to the form of the swelling as follows:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And upon the head place linen cloths so that the flesh does not injure the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And let the navel of the patient be pressed down, and let the hand or arm be extended over the body inside the parts below, and let the body be bandaged around the helpers and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And let the arm be placed on a ladder according to the latitude, and the hand be extended below the parts, and the other side be suspended from the other side, because the joint will soon follow.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument is complete according to each manner that is possible for you, then it is necessary that you place below the navel a pad of wool of equal quantity; and afterward place a plaster prepared with powder of burnt eggshells and albumen of eggs over all the muscle, as mentioned above, and then strengthen below the navel with appropriate bandaging; and the bandage should be wrapped around the plaster, and the hand should be attached to the neck, and left alone, and do not disturb the hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And it is necessary that the patient's food be small until the member is strengthened, for it is easier for their recovery.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then food should be given more after seven or five days, and exercise one movement; and thus if it is firm and not softened, now it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated due to swelling that occurs or for some other reason, then it is necessary to administer cautery with three tractions as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after about seven days the bandage is removed and the joint has not healed, and the plaster and strapping are reduced over several applications, and it cannot be fixed, and he cannot raise that arm to the upper parts, then you know that the nerves of it, which run to the head of the muscle, have either been cut or stretched or weakened, and understand that the joint will never heal in its proper place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Regarding the dislocation that occurs from the feet and the hip or the posterior parts, the reduction is performed with impulse and extension as much as necessary until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And let the other strapping be applied to it, and care for it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if heaviness and slowness in the movement occur near recovery, then the patient should use baths several times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the neck.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it can be dislocated in all directions, but mostly toward the front or back. And this dislocation does not hide from you when it lies beneath the skin or by touch according to its figure, and when you adjust the dislocated neck, that is made clear to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor reach the muscle's usual place.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And it is necessary that you treat the neck, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it becomes inflamed, because if it becomes inflamed, reduction will be difficult, and even after a long time it may not heal completely. And especially when it is in the posterior parts, for it is worse than all other types of dislocations, more painful, and often leads to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it is such that if it is possible to reduce it, then the hand should be extended beyond the two fingers, and the arm should be expanded, and the physician's hands should be above the joint below it, and he should push the joint with his fingertips or with the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is to the front parts, then it returns thus: bend the hand with its fingers, so that he strikes the joint with the palm of his hand.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer vigorous extension and strong movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two ministers should extend the arm, and they should hold it thus with two ministers so that it is not bent due to the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And it should be rotated the arm in all directions, since it is wrapped in folded cloth long over the hand, or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that this helps in the lubricity of the joint for ease; and then push the joint with strong pressure until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And after the reduction, it is necessary for the patient to rest on a plaster bandage that has stipticity and support with an eagle's claw position, and be wrapped tightly, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and left like this for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it should be loosened; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you loosen the bandage of it and leave it like that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint should not be stitched, then apply the plaster and bandage again, and leave it like that for several days until it is healed; and afterwards remove it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	And if it happens that there is great pain during the reduction of the joint and its position is in motion, then administer humidification through bathing and gentle friction, and compression until it is calmed; or place upon the joint something immobile, which is called an immobile support; and afterwards bind it, and leave it on the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And afterwards remove that, and place it in a bath; and when it is dry, then you should rub the joint with moderate friction, and afterwards apply an immobile support again, which is called a hard bandage, once, and the second time, and the third time,
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	in the bathing instrument until it is finished.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place a humid and heated cow's hide on that wound and stitch it; and do this for several times, as it is moist and helps to restore its position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation of the wrist joint, which is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The wrist joint sometimes becomes dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is easy, but the opposite is true for other joints. Nevertheless, it is necessary to act with speed in reducing it at the moment when it is dislocated, before swelling occurs or an abscess forms.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	Here is the translation:
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it must be considered whether the palm is already stretched over the belly of the hand. If the injury has occurred, then place the back of the patient's hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation was before placing both hands down, then position the hand intrinsically on the table so that the doctor's hand can act directly upon that proximity of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns immediately, that is good; but otherwise, then strengthen that area with a bandage covering the abscess and leave it like that; and do not repeat this action, for otherwise, it will neither suffer nor allow the reduction of the pus over the days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint moves according to its tortuousness; and if you notice in the patient no cause for pain, except that the hand is softened and cannot bear any weight; then know that the nerves are either crushed or severed, and at this point do not apply anything but cauterize it properly, and strengthen it so as not to cause further injury.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And when it has been properly returned, then place on the bandage which we have recommended, and let it be left and strengthened for five days; and afterward, it should be loosened and left, with the hand of the patient being exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	However, if the movement of the hand is restricted and you encounter any severity in it, then apply that area with warm water and friction several times until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the Treatment of the Dislocation of the Said Joints.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Several times the said joints may become completely dislocated.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	When a finger is dislocated at the joint nearest the palm or at the middle joint, hold the finger still and gently push the dislocation back into place.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then hold the tip of the finger, and suspend it above the part that is dislocated, and leave it like this for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and extend it until it is properly bandaged on that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, wrap it as described, and do not stop unwrapping it during the day to exercise its movement, and wrap it at night; and do this for several days until it is strong.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same if it is dislocated at the wrist, and wrap it in this manner and perform the first operation like this until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And do the same when it is dislocated at other parts as well.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae in the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs in one of the vertebrae of the back or neck and the vertebrae are moved from their positions, then there is no treatment for this, as death is feared for the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	The sign of this is that the patient's defecation occurs without their will, and they cannot control it; often, some parts of their body become weak or two limbs on one side or both arms, or one of these; or a vertebra is displaced from its position, as sometimes it shifts and sometimes it moves to four different directions.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Thus it is described for the parts behind and is called jellyfish-like.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The treatment for it is that you consider whether the condition occurred due to labor, for if it did, there is no cure then, nor will it heal completely from that.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in the case where it comes from a fall or a blow or something similar to these, the Ancients described the methods of treatment at great length, much of which I cannot recall; but I have abbreviated what little can excuse the abundance, due to my closeness to understanding and exposition, with which I have laid out and formed this from various instruments different from those with which I would show this and explain that.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And he says that in the condition occurring at the front part of the feet, there is neither remedy nor healing for it; and similarly for those made on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And only those are cured which occur exactly as I describe on both sides.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient lies on his face near a wall, and lies below the bed in such a way that his feet are not touching the ground.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And nearby a straight post should be placed, planted in the ground at the end near his head, and another post around his feet at the other end of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister should hold the post, and it should not be fixed in a hole; and another minister should hold the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And nearby wrap around the head of the patient and below the shoulders tie a strong bandage; and extend the end of the bandage to the post that is behind his head, and tie it there; and then stretch the other bandage over the hips of the patient with the hands behind the buttocks; and then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other post that is behind his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Then let the attendant extend the bandages at the part of the body, and do not remove the two limbs and the bandages from their places where they are placed, but rather do not secure them so firmly as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	Then the physician should place his palms on the strong part of the spine until it returns, or he should place it on that table, and then adjust the patient's weight on the table until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return by this method, now take a table whose width or length is about three arms, and dig into the wall near the patient a place where the end of the table can fit.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Then place the middle of the table on the spine, and the physician should place his weight on the other end, and pull gently until the spine is compressed and returns to its proper place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open the ring which is revolved around the hand; and it is that you place the patient on the ground with the head of the patient at the end of two poles, the length of which is one arm, and from the head of the patient to the other end, two similar poles; and the distance between each pole should be a palm, and they are fixed in the ground so that they do not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be one round pole in which is the ring, and it should revolve around the two ends of the two poles.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a knob in which the pole is formed, the length of which is one palm where it is revolved; and on the two other poles there is something similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Unbind the bandages that you have tightly bound to the patient’s feet at the time when you were about to cut his head, and the bandages that you have tightly bound around his thighs at the time when you were about to cut his legs.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	You should have each turn held by a minister with his hand, and the surgeon should hold the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And after the spine is returned and the place is adjusted, now you should apply an excipient poultice on white cloth, and then add wool; and then place over the poultice strips of wood whose width is three fingers or around that size, and whose length should cover the area affected by inflammation, and along the part of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then bind it with the bandage as we have described, and let the patient use delicate nourishment until he is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any inflammation remains in the area at the end of the healing process, now you should administer medicines that soften and soothe through prolonged application, as we have recommended; and a sheet of lead is also applied to that location.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And at times inflammation occurs in the back of the lower spine due to displacement; and that bone is one where it is not advisable to apply this medicine, as it could easily lead to fatal consequences.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the bone and the joint of the muscle are subject only to dislocation, and do not suffer what happens to other joints with slight movement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the bone is dislocated in four ways, for it can be dislocated inwardly, outwardly, forward, or backward.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is most commonly dislocated inwardly, and rarely forward or backward.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation inward is that when you adjust the leg of the healthy side against the affected side, it is longer and the heel is more prominent than on the healthy side, and the patient cannot bend their knee towards their chest, and this location where bending occurs is often inflamed or swollen due to cautery, so the head of the bone has already reached here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of one to whom dislocation occurs outwardly is that the symptoms of it are contrary to those mentioned earlier.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of one to whom dislocation occurs forward is that when lifting the leg according to its full range, it does not bend due to pain in the heel, and if they attempt to walk, they cannot step forward; and their urine is retained and their swallowing is swollen, and they must walk on the sole of their foot.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of one to whom dislocation occurs backward is that they cannot extend their heel, nor can they bend it forward as much as the other leg, and their leg is shorter than the other, and their throat is swollen, and the head of the bone is in that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The final reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, at this time, if the dislocation is old and ancient, which already has been suffered by its owner for some time, you administer reduction to it and treat it according to its disposition; now it is not in that complete cure; and then there must be no expectation of full recovery.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In the case where the dislocation is recent and belongs to one of the four species of dislocation, now you must attend to this by returning the joint and extending it in both directions within and without, and move it to the right and left, for it easily returns and does not require any other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	However, if it does not return in this manner, now you must prepare a strong assistant and extend the side of the limb from below, or along its sides, or use a bandage that is wrapped above the joint; and another assistant should extend the hand over there so as to place their hands on either side of the joint; then apply a lion's bandage tightly around the joint, and have another assistant hold the end of the bandage.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And this extension of the limb or of the part inside towards the clavicle, or of the part behind towards the back.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And perform the extension of all these in one motion while the patient is raised off the ground and remains hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this species of extension is common to all four types.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and if not, now it is necessary for all species what I will say about its proper treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the shoulder when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is towards the inner parts, it must be that the patient lies supine on his back; and then place the bandages along the ridge of the shoulder in the place where between the head of the shoulder and the place below the collarbone; and then extend the bandage from the angle as far as the outermost part of the clavicle.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another strong assistant should take hold of his arms and firmly grasp the thick part of the dislocated shoulder and extend it outward with great force, for that returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this particular type is the easiest to cure among those in which this member is reduced compared to the other types.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if it slips away from you and does not obey in the exercise for this type of treatment at all, then bandages must be placed on both sides of the patient's body with a strong, light bandage over both heels and both toes.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each be four fingers, and let the affected side be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then the patient should be suspended above the top of a post, and he should be in the hand; and let the distance from him to the ground be two arms' lengths.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong youth to press down the head of the shoulder, and let another youth hold the patient, and the other youth pull the shoulder firmly upwards, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the reduction of the shoulder when it is dislocated towards the outer part, it must be that the patient lies on his back as we have recommended in yellow fever; and the bandage should be tightly wrapped around the affected side properly and over the feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Place two poles beside the patient, one at the feet and the other at the head; and beside them place a pole adjusted to the middle of his back, placed upon which wet cloths are wrapped around him so that the patient is not harmed by the pole being among the things of him, so that the extension to the parts below is not pulled away.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each attendant extends to his part, and the surgeon, with his hands, adjusts the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you obey the reversal, it will be good greatly; and if not, place it carefully as we have said in jaundice for that adjustment.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But it is necessary that the patient lies on his side calmly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is to the front parts, then it is necessary that the bench be extended quickly, and according to this method described on the back; and the surgeon places the palm of his right hand on the patient's shoulder, and with the other hand he grasps it firmly, and with this firm grasp extends it to the rear parts toward the front.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is to the rear parts, then it is not necessary that the patient be extended to the side parts and raised above the ground; rather, he should be placed on a hard surface, just as it is necessary for him similarly if his hip is dislocated outward, according to what we have said about the positioning of the body between two poles; and it is on his back with his limbs extended, as we have said, there is no harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it is necessary to administer compression on the table at the location of the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Thus, when the reduction is complete as it should be — and the sign of the reduction of the bone is not hidden from you, and that is when you extend the patient's two hands, and when you see those equal parts and the patient extends one hand and expands this one for an excuse, then you know that the limb as it should be has been returned — and then you adjust two things and pause in applying plaster and wrap both with a bandage so that the width is not diminished in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then loosen the ligature and the plaster, and compare one hand with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Now, if you see those equal parts clearly, then you know that the dislocation has already been fixed, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of inflammation, then you return and plaster that area, and extend it according to your initial structure, and let it be for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then loosen that area, and allow the patient to delay in walking on each [affected part] for several days until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the outer parts, to the inner parts, and to the lower parts more so than to the rear; but it cannot be dislocated to the front parts.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that when you instruct the patient to apply their hand to the head, then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And for the restoration of all kinds of dislocations you should make the patient lie down straight; then place your hand on his chest if possible; press your two thumbs against his cheek, and put his foot between your hands; then firmly hold those hands over his ankle, and another assistant should extend his leg so that the bone returns to its proper place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of successful reduction is that his chest adheres to the bed without laborious effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply a plaster to that area and make the bandage adhere to the chest, and afterwards bind those areas together with a bandage for three days or four, and then loosen them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not allow the patient to walk for several days until he is healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of it to you is unnecessary, now administer strong extension with the instruments previously described in the treatment of the hip.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the thigh.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The thigh sometimes is moved by slight displacement, and sometimes it is dislocated completely, and the dislocation of it occurs either towards the inside parts or towards the outside parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of it is that you see the thigh swollen towards the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the treatment of its slight displacement is easy reduction, and it should be extended with ease by the hands until it returns to its place.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	In the treatment of the shoulder when it is dislocated as a second step, make sure you have the patient lying straight, and let there be a strong and capable assistant behind him at his side.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And place yourself with your right hand above the uppermost part of his foot, and with your left hand below the lower part of his foot at the joint.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And pull the foot with your right hand, and then grasp it with your left hand for two moments, and then extend your left hand; and press the heel of the foot with your right hand vigorously.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this two times as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then press the heel of the foot with your hand for the third time, and you will be at the joint.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Then if it returns in one attempt or two according to this method, and if the foot feels equalized, it is good; and otherwise, immediately repeat the operation, for it will return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you are prohibited from reducing it as we have recommended, then have the patient lie on his back on the ground, and place a strong board on firm ground under him, and make sure it fits between his shoulders, and you should wrap a cloth around him so that he does not slide.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the assistant hold his shoulders, and another assistant extend the foot with his hands or with straps placed on the back of the foot; and then each assistant pull against the extension on their side, and the board should be extended between his shoulders keeping him in place so that his body is not pulled towards the sides during the extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Then the surgeon pulls the dislocated parts apart, and another assistant holds the healthy limb above, for the dislocation returns with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And so when the dislocation returns and the proper reduction is demonstrated to you, apply a plaster and wrap it tightly with bandages, and bind the limb securely to the bed.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful to avoid the nerves which are located behind the heel, so that the bandage over them is not too tight and does not damage them severely.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then leave it like that for two days or three; and if the bandage has loosened, wrap it again.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Then untie it on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if the patient is forced to move before that time, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not dissolve and be corrupted, and after that it may no longer be treatable.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if an abscess occurs that requires cauterization, then you should proceed according to the instructions given in our narrative for the treatment and application described elsewhere, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the said feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Ensure that the person who is dislocated is pulled with some extension without excessive force; and what is not difficult is often easy.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in any of the joints of both feet, then you should have the patient lie down with their feet on a raised surface or table, and position them as if they were standing.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Here you should feel the pulse, and place your finger on what approaches of the joints, and then press that part with your finger firmly until it returns, and you see that it is inflamed and does not appear in a prominent location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then press the bottom of the foot against a board that fits the entire foot, which has two ends, and then stretch that part with proper firmness for three days; then loosen it and allow it to rest from walking for ten days, until it is stretched and its recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	About the types of dislocation that are caused by plague or fracture or any such conditions.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any cause of those conditions occurs, and you fail in the treatment of it and in the restoration of the patient, many times death follows.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And because of this, one should not take charge of the treatment unless they are wise in the art, experienced for a long time, merciful and pious, neither hasty nor presumptuous; and at the beginning use medicines that merely reduce swellings, and leave the patient to divine judgment, but refer them to someone from whom you hope for salvation from perdition, or relief from illness, where there appears any hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then strive to perform the reduction for the patient at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes a severe swelling.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the member returns as we want it to, immediately administer a regimen that reduces severe swelling and treats the injury with what is appropriate from among the dried remedies.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is with a fracture and it happens in the bones that are separated, then you perforate their membranes, and do what we have said about the simple diseases concerning what precedes in the places of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your virtue the one of the instrument in the ways of fear as it has preceded in my preaching; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more salutary will be seen by you in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Albucasis perfectly; may God be blessed for them.
Amen.	Amen.
