Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, my children, now I have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine. By its completion at the end and by its exposition, and by its explanations, it seems to me that I have rendered comprehensible to you the treatise which pertains to my practice, namely surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For surgery in our region and in our time has been almost entirely deprived, except that the science of it was somewhat visible, and its traces remained; but we would know little about it beyond small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have altered many things and led to errors and hesitation due to their obscure expressions and weakened strength of the art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I should enliven this treatise according to the method of exposition and explanation and abbreviation; and so that it may come with the forms of cautery tools and other instruments of the work as is necessary through addition of explanation and preparation, which cause is essential.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the reason why a good practitioner is not easily found in our profession in this time is that the art of medicine is extensive, and one must be trained in the science of anatomy, which involves knowing the functions of the members and their forms, as well as their connections and separations; and having knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, their numbers, and their positions; and of the pulsating veins and the static ones, and the places for their incisions.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this reason Hippocrates said that in name it is much, but in practice little, and even less in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already said this at the beginning of this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy will inevitably fall into error through which men may die, as I have seen too many of them, for some are formed in this science and get themselves out of that with no knowledge or experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a foolish doctor who had incised an abscess in the neck of a woman, and he cut into some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed out, and the woman died as a result.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who attempted to remove a stone from a man who was suffering from bladder stones, and the stone was large. He came to him and extracted that stone along with part of the bladder, whereupon that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I had already called to remove that stone and saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew beyond a doubt that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who was receiving payment from a duke of our land to perform surgery. He came to a black castrated man who had a fracture in his thigh; and due to the doctor's ignorance, he removed the plaster over the fracture before it was ready, applying poultices and splints with too much force, not allowing the wound proper healing time.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And he loosened it according to his desires, and soon after he relieved him, and after some days commanded us to remove the bandage. And thus it was that the thigh and leg became abscessed, and he came to ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to attend him, and I prepared to remove the bandage. Achieving some relief, he was thus freed from his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, once the corruption was confirmed in the limb, so that it could not be restrained, and the corruption did not cease to spread throughout the limb until the patient's danger increased.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who incised a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated near the armpit, until the malignancy greatly revealed its evil nature to lord so-and-so.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause of this is that the malignant condition is pure of melancholic humor; therefore, it does not need to affect all parts equally, but rather it affects the member which can withstand being its host.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, children, it is necessary for you that the operation be planned in two aspects: one is an operation associated with health, and the other is work in which there is risk even under the best conditions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already discussed this in every part of this book where there is an operation involving error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard against that and leave aside this, so that the pages do not lead me to speak and thus dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And so take up your arms with diligence and the protection of God, and your patients with skill and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best path by God's grace to lead to health and praiseworthy success, and leave behind terrible diseases that are difficult to heal, and keep your weapons away from what causes you fear, so that hesitation does not undermine your faith and reputation: for more remains for your glory, and after in the world and finally to your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Wound treatment in some monastic surgeries:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat illness badly, for thus bad doctors are not named.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have dedicated this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The division of the book begins, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered regarding the head and neck, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cautery, and of what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, concerning incision and puncture, and of cupping, and of plasters, and of the extraction of arrows and similar things, fully chaptered and ordered regarding the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, concerning restoration and dislocation, and the treatment of twists and similar conditions; a chapter ordered regarding the head and neck, and the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Concerning cautery with fire and with sharp medicine and the remembrance of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	There begins the treatise of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I will speak of the quality of the movements of that cautery and of its instruments, and in what condition cautery should be prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the speech about the quality of the movement of cautery and of its instrument is long and verbose, subtle by science, and hidden as a secret; many wise men have spoken much about it, and they are discordant among themselves, but for me a little of their speeches suffices, fearing to be protracted.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	Therefore, I say that cauteries conform to all complete formations universally, whether they are made of material or immaterial substances, with the exception of two formations, which are tail-like formations without material substance.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the tail-like and dry formation made of material, it dries out; for some say that cauteries are helpful in this case, while others say the opposite, that cauteries are not suitable for a disease which is due to quality and dryness, since the nature of fire is hot and dry, and it is inappropriate that a tail-like and dry disease be treated with something that is hot and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And those who say the opposite are mistaken, that cauteries are beneficial in every tail-like and dry disease that occurs in human bodies, for when you compare the human body and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find that the human body is more fragile.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say according to the words of that person, that through experience I have already discovered this myself on several occasions.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But it does not suit him who has already been trained and exercised in the chapter of cauteries through previous practice, and who has known the diversity of human constitutions and the disposition of diseases in their seasons, as well as their causes and accidents, and the time span of them.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other formations, there is no need for fear on your part, especially in fragile and humid diseases, since all doctors are now in agreement about these, and they do not disagree regarding the use of cauteries in them.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, that the secret of healing by cauteries with fire and its goodness lies in the fact that fire is simple, and its action affects only the member being cauterized and does not harm other members adjacent to it except for slight discomfort.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	Here is the English translation:
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Take the fire, by its elevation and goodness of substance, it does nothing but superfluify [sic], and already it is known to us through experiment and length of service in studying the art regarding the truth of causes; and for this I excuse myself from the length of speech. And if not that it were not read in my book at this place hidden secrets with fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies and the expulsion process by which you expel diseases, in a philosophical demonstrative speech, which would be sharp in your possessions.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that they disagree about the time when it is appropriate to perform cautery and pause at the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, for the harm caused by accidental circumstances is submerged in the benefit of what is attracted through cautery, and especially if the cautery is performed due to necessary pains or inflammations, which cannot tolerate delay because it is feared that such conditions could lead to greater malice, which is worse than a small harm entering with the times.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And this does not concern your possessions, or, children, what is valued only by the common people and foolish doctors, is that for the disease which is cured by cautery it is not suitable at all times, and they pause at the consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the reason is not thus because they think about it, for cautery is nothing but a substitute for medicine that alters the complexion and dries up the humidities which are the cause of the pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But yet, cautery surpasses medicine in terms of the speed of its effectiveness and the virtue of its operation and the greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that his illness may return at some time according to the patient's constitution and the location of his illness, and its nature, and what has been prepared in his body by the aggregation of superfluities in him, and what has reached him through his acquisition in food and similar causes; but if it is a subtle illness with few superfluities and humidities, such as cautery for toothache and similar cases, it may not return that pain, but this applies to small matters.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And the common saying is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is the saying of a craftsman, not what those who understand it say, for I believe there is no cure that benefits either from medicine or any other cause before applying cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when administering methods of treatment for certain illnesses, where other medicines are ineffective, and at the end of the cause, one applies cautery, and it benefits in such cases.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And here from what was said before that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which I understand of the common and faults of foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the location for cautery does not matter, which is not absolutely true, because I have experienced this and have found that it works differently on different bodies; cautery with gold can be better than with iron as others claim. However, when you use fire to apply gold for cautery, it is not clear how much to prepare, since the hardness of gold requires proper adjustment; if you set it over fire, the gold will melt due to the heat, and placing some plates in the fire helps the craftsman work with it.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And thus is made the cautery of iron, which should be applied lightly and gradually according to the correctness of the procedure.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already arranged this chapter on cauteries according to the chapters, and I have placed those for the head among the parts, so that I alleviate the seeker who asks for what they desire.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cautery for headache due to cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery is applied to the humidity and coldness that cause accidental headaches due to these two causes, which are caused by sweating and a large amount of rheumatic flux, called coryza, affecting the head and ears, as well as excessive sleepiness, toothache, and throat pain, and generally all illnesses that come from coldness, such as paralysis, stroke, and similar conditions.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: first, command the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine for the head cleansing, for three or four nights, according to what you deem necessary based on the strength of the patient and their age and habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then place him to sit on a reclined bench and have him rest his head on his own hands.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the palm of your hand above the nose, between the eyebrows, on the shaved area.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But when the heat of your hand has reached that place, mark that spot with a needle, and then apply the olive wood cautery, which is made as follows:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then pause that which is sewn with thread, in such a way that it descends, with the membrane of which the wound must be gradually constricted, and you turn it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand gently and look at the place, and if you see any quantity of bone already exposed, as much as the quantity of grain in one ear of corn, then raise your hand, and if not return your hand to that tool, or another like it, if it is cold, until you can feel the bone which I have told you about.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the place and let it be for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then sew around the wound embedded at the edge and let it be inside until the burn scar is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the place with a quadruple ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they say that when the plague ulcer opens spontaneously, it is better and more helpful to let the arm be so.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them say that the cord should be cauterized to the bone, and that the cautery should remain until it adheres to some part of the bone.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then remove what is adhered to the bone, and then it should be treated.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that with the cautery it should reach to the deepest part, until it presses strongly against the bone until the bone melts, and this is the method of alpechini (small burns):
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that place the vapors of the head emanate.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let the wound be treated for a long time until it is healed and has consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I have not seen these two types of cautery used generally on everyone out of fear; and leave that one alone, for me it is better to be healthy without it. For the head is delicate because of the solution of continuity of its veins as we have testified in other parts of the body, especially when the nature of the patient's head is weak.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is safer and better for me; and with that one I can work more safely.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Second.
Del cauteri del cap.	About cauterization of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head, and this is prolonged in the patient despite the use of plasters, compresses, decoctions, poultices, ointments, and other remedies, especially if cauterization with a previously used cautery has not been beneficial for any of these causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution and not weak. If there is no significant tenderness, proceed to cauterize with another type of cautery below that one slightly.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that area above the crown of their head with a cautery until the pain is relieved.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the pain and expose the bone in the quantity that we have described, and cauterize that area with a cautery at the back of the head in the place called "vas," which is where the vein is located.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And take care in this, and do not expose the bone, for the patient from this would discover great pain different from the pain of all other cauteries of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And here I will describe this cautery in its place, for it is fitting that the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Chapter Three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On Cauterization of Recent Wounds.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When severe pain is found in the upper part of the head, or if there is persistent pain within the skull, it should be evacuated with medicines that purify the head, and the other treatment which I have described for diseases should be administered; and if this does not benefit, then cauterization is done in two ways: either cauterization with a sharp combustible medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But if you use a cautery with a combustible medicine, then take a piece of wax, and burn it by extinguishing the ends of it from both sides.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then you should incise the area of the pain on the temple with a lancet, deeply enough for it to be done properly below the skin, so that it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then apply pressure to it with bandages by tightening them securely, and leave that for the space of three hours; and then loosen it and remove the wax, and leave the wound covered for two or three days, and afterwards place a poultice on it soaked in butter until the area becomes warm.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	For the treatment of that which is inside, let it be healed with medicine.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, use some of the medicines that I have written about in the twelfth chapter on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But when you cauterize with iron according to this method, use fire for the cautery, and this is its form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a nail clamp, for its head is in the shape of a nail, with some curvature, and in the middle part of it there is a small protrusion.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then press on the location of the pain, and hold your hand—so that the artery below is not adhered—and turn the iron slightly little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount that is adhered due to the curvature is as much as half of it, raise your hand so that the artery below does not adhere, so that there is no bleeding.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak cotton in salt water and place it on the location, and leave it for three days; and afterwards apply honeyed bandages, and subsequently treat with internal medicine to heal.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize at the end of the radius according to the cautery method, and be careful not to cut the artery in this ancient procedure.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the cauterization of an ancient ulcer.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat an ulcer as we have described in the previous treatment and in the divisions of diseases, and if it does not improve, and sometimes due to the severity of the disease, neither the first cautery with medicine nor the cautery with fire is sufficient, then it is necessary for you to ignite the radial cautery until it becomes white-hot. Place it on the site of the pain in a line along its length, which is half the width of your finger or slightly more; and then hold your hand steady and press firmly so that it does not cut the artery but penetrates to the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which is curved due to mastication, and that the lizard [muscle] does not adhere and the nerves which move it, and that it does not become spasmodic.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the care and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is cut, because in its cutting there is danger, especially for one who does not know what they are doing and is not skilled and experienced; and leave the operation to someone else at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And here I will come to the reminder of the management of blood flow from an artery according to the usual method, in its place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this illness does not respond to these cautery treatments and the patient's condition is tolerable, cauterize in the appropriate place of the head as we have recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you perform the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on the rupture of an artery with a cautery having two prongs, this is better cautery and more effective.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cautery for ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain in the ear occurs due to friction and is treated with laxative causes and with the other treatment that I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain does not improve, now use the cautery, which is called puncta. Here is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And approach the puncta to the fire, and move it around the entire ear as a wheel revolves, or around each part if the pain is in that part.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Take the cautery of the cutting of the ear little by little until you have marked the place with it.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of these points in the entire ear, and wherever it is needed, and take care of the places inside until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cautery of the turtle.  
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The one for which treatment and cautery are not used is only of the types that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery for the type that arises from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that type of tumor with jars and capipurgi and gargle treatments, and if your treatment does not succeed, then it is necessary to cauterize the disease with three applications: the first at the root of the ear, and the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of both lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cauterization at the opposite part of the diseased area, for softening occurs only in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cauterization is that you cauterize there with the cautery on the right side at the extremity of the most prominent ear, and then above the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of a thumb, and then pause your hand with the cautery until the amount equal to half the thickness of the cord is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a special type of knife, the form of which is set forth above.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, even more subtle is that which you see only slightly; and it is necessary to use a knife instead of excessive coarseness, somewhat delicately.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with the liquid that was previously prepared until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of the cautery for ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said and do not cause fever in the patient, then cauterize it with four cauteries: on top of all the temples of their head; and one cauterization on the middle part of the head, as we have said; and one cauterization on the nape.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cauterizations is done as mentioned above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and this is better; and then proceed to treat it as appropriate.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of cauterization for forgetfulness done with live coal.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Give the patient large doses and pills of theriac at the beginning.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then shave the patient's head completely and apply a plaster to the nape as described in the chapter on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And apply it several times, for this is the method of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to the method I have already described.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if this treatment is effective; otherwise, then perform three cauteries on the rear part of their head, which should be located descending from the highest part of the head towards the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And wait between each cauterization the thickness of a finger, and then proceed to treat the cauterized area as appropriate.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you apply it to the ulcer and it is able to tolerate that, then now make the cautery in the middle area; and if you want a greater effect, now cauterize it over the two horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Proceed with the treatment until it is healed; and let the cautery be in the shape of an olive as given before.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cautery for parasites and the softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Proceed as you would in the cleansing of the head according to what has been said and what we have mentioned; then shave the head of the patient, and afterwards cauterize it with a cautery in the middle part of the head, and with a cautery over all the parts of the head, and with a cautery on the rear part of it, and with three cauteries along the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the illness of softening the body to do that and the patient can tolerate it and the illness is severe, then cauterize it with four cauteries along the vertebrae of the back, and finally with a cautery inside so that it is covered by the skin, and raise the heat moderately.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then proceed with the treatment until it is healed, and this should be an olive-shaped cautery.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cautery for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	An epileptic should not be cauterized unless the epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And so you should cleanse the brain of the patient at the beginning with herbs and with the other treatment that we have mentioned in the division when the illness is severe and the patient can tolerate the exception of medications.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, at that time administer gargles and mouthwashes to clean the mouth, for two or three days, along with the purification of foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize one area with a cautery at the proper location on the head according to the previous method, and another cauterization at the occiput, and over each corner of the head he should cauterize.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize with the cauteries that I have mentioned, having paralysis and relaxation of the body over the cervical vertebrae and the thoracic vertebrae.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let it be an olive cauterization as has been described previously.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then proceed with a gentle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On Cauterization for Melancholia.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholia are due to corrupted and flabby tissues, then cauterize with the cauteries that we have mentioned, having paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholia is an excess inclining towards melancholia, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him to drink what purifies his brain according to what has been described previously in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then apply a well-made trepanation around the circle, and proceed with that at the proper location on the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	Let the wound be sixty days old, and let it be treated from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a liniment; and it is better to use the grease of sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that over the fire with moderate warmth according to measure, which the patient can tolerate when it is applied.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place that in the middle of the head of the patient in a circle, and let it be rubbed in.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this once a week for the wound, and follow the regimen until it is healed; or if you prefer, cauterize that in small points according to what is necessary, but have your hand with a cautery properly arranged: this is a special kind of cautery that moistens the brain with moderation.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then apply that powder mixed in grease or in chicken fat.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cautery of water descending in the belly.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is clear to you the beginning of water in the belly by the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient to drink what purifies his head, and guard against all humidity for him.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And have that person sweat in baths for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of water descending into two bellies, or on one side if it is the beginning of water in one belly.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut and cauterize all the veins and arteries that you leave for the ligature; and place the cautery at a distance in the region of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And guard against bleeding when it is cauterized; and if you see any bleeding, stop it with some medicine, which is within your power.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come to the knowledge that is in the extraction of arteries and their ligation and caution against bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And in some cases it is cauterized on the neck below two bones with two cauteries deliberately produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old wounds.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the eyes are old and frequent, and through the veins and arteries that are in the obvious part of the head, it is verified that this is due to cold phlegmatic excess; then cauterize that with the cautery which we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of water flowing into the eyes, and with a cautery at the middle part of the head, and with two cauteries at the neck below two temples, and with two cauteries at the neck below two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need addition, then cauterize that across the entire area of the eye socket above the upper eyelid with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the cauterization of nasal odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that person with what we have said in the division and they do not benefit from your treatment, then prepare and give the patient cochineal to drink for three nights; afterward shave their head, and cauterize them with a moderate cautery using an olive-wood cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And so cauterize that part with a cautery in the shape of a trefoil, using two cauteries above the eyebrows, leaving the hair a little bit.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful of the archery so that you do not injure it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the shape of the trefoil cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On Cauteries for Softening the Eyelids of the Eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery in the shape of this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do so, cauterize that area above the two eyebrows slightly with two cauteries in total, and let them extend towards the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather so that one-third of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On Cauteries for the Eyelid of the Eye When the Hairs Turn Inward and Poke the Eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eye turn inward such that they poke the eye, cauterization in those cases is done according to two methods: either by performing it or by using a combustible medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you cauterize the wound with fire, command the barber to shave around it just as one would for those which are mundane, entering where they are extended and evened out; and if you grasp that of their growth, then wrap them with a bandage so that nothing is left before the hair grows back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Once they have grown back and evened out, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and gently press upon the eyelids over the wound with a probe, marked as according to the shape of a leaf of mercury, and let the beginning of the mark be near the hair.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then place a small piece of linen or mucilage of fine flour on the wound.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then apply the cautery, which this is the form of.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize over the figure that you have marked, little by little, in small stages, until the surface of the area which is like a myrtle leaf is completely burned through properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of health in your work is that you see the eyelid of the wound already contracted and the hair around it raised above the puncture.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and lay it upon that for three days, and afterwards place a piece of cloth over it until the scar is remedied.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the hair around it becomes affected near its growth and the eyelid is softened, then perform the cautery on that again just as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If there are hairs inside the lower eyelid, then at that time cauterize it so that it is raised to its natural place and healed, and that the hairs do not touch the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	You should cauterize with a burning medicine in this case; command the patient to pull out the hairs until they are long and healed, and then make it from paper or cloth in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take known soap and one ounce of a living herb, or something similar to it, and mix those ingredients well, and apply it quickly so that it is not rubbed; then spread this over the paper which is made as the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it on both eyes; and place under each eye wrapped in clean cloth, and have the patient's head in your lap.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place your finger on the medicine and press it slightly so that the patient feels the sting of the medicine, for this sting is like that of fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when the patient perceives the stinging sensation, then remove the medicine and wash it with your finger; once the stinging stops, then wash the eye with water. And now check if the eyelid is raised as it should be; if so, you can proceed with cautery or incision, for this is good progress. If not, return to applying the medicine to a different location where it has not been applied yet and do not allow it to darken until it heals and the eye returns to its proper state.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place it on the affected area at the border until the condition of the irritation is eradicated, and then treat it with healing medication or another remedy until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	It is necessary for you to guard your operation with vigilant diligence so that no part of the medicine falls into the eye. And if after some days the eyelid has become softened and any cause of hair pulling in the eye, then again apply your medicine to that place where the eyelid has softened, and properly as you did at the beginning, and soon within it will be healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of the myrtle leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you should know that the eyes of people vary in size and smallness, and therefore according to this, your treatment is adjusted.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And the way to truth in this art will not be hidden from one who studies in this field.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On Cauterization of a Fistula in the Lacrimal Region of the Eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not confer with your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method: instruct the patient to place his head on your lap, and hold the patient's head steady between your hands in such a way that it does not move or shake.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place a piece of cloth soaked in egg white or in a paste of flour over the eye of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then heat the cautery, which has this form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is made of copper, similar in shape to a reed or the quill of an eagle, with one end shaped like the cautery.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, enter into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to be as soft as a sponge.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But he who is concave is better for the task at hand.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and let it drain and dry it out.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, now open it and extract the corruption from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then press on it with the cautery which should be well heated, and place it there but a little, so that you do not miss your hand or the wound become agitated, and now place the cautery in the flesh of the nose and burn that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And thus if at the beginning of your cauterization it penetrates to the bone, that is good; and if not, now repeat the cautery once or twice, as needed; and leave it thus for three days, and then press on that wound gently and around it apply a drying agent until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if after these days it has not healed, now apply to it acute corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and proceed as necessary according to its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula which they first described as follows: enter the location of the fistula and clean it, and then place in that fissure finely powdered material according to its form. And pour into it one ounce of melted lead; and with your hand gently but firmly, so that the wound does not become agitated because the melted lead should not reach the flesh around it; and ensure that you press on the wound’s surface covered in egg white or water, for lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, that is well; but otherwise, it is necessary to administer nasal trephination and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose according to how it will come into its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On Cauterization of the Fistula of the Pouch.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Often such fissures occur in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those fissures with what we have mentioned in the divisions and your treatment is not effective, then use a small knife-shaped cautery according to this form that will be shown:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let the heat of the cautery be according to the subtlety of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Apply that heated point carefully to those fissures until the cautery reaches the depth of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area with ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On Cauterization of Fistula in the Mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess occurs on the uvula or palate or on the gums near the teeth, and it bursts, and then becomes inflamed, and forms a fistula, and when you treat that fistula and the treatment is not effective, then it is necessary to ignite a cautery according to the size of the fistula, and then place that heated instrument into the tract of the fistula, and with your hand ensure that the hot iron reaches the depth of it; do this once or twice; and then treat it as we have said about treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	Therefore, if the sinew is cut and heals, it is good; but otherwise, it is necessary to discover the place and remove the corrupted bone as will be explained in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the cauterization of teeth and the softening of gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are diseased, and you treat them with medicines and do not confine them, then place the tip of the cautery in its proper position, and immediately ignite it so that you place the tube over the tooth and insert the cautery quickly into it; leave it there for a short time until the pain from the heat reaches the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then remove your hand, and shortly afterward repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for one hour, after which he can spit it out, as the diseased tooth is now restrained, the softened gum has become firm, and the corrupted moisture has been dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cauterization of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to coldness, or there is decay or vermin, or if you do not confine the treatment with medicine, then the cautery can be applied in two ways: either with a cow's horn or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	The cautery with a horn is that you take a cow's horn and heat it over charcoal, then take cotton and wrap it around the heated end of the horn. Then immerse it in cold water, and quickly place it on the painful tooth until it is cooled.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	From there, apply hot cloths until the heat reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you do so, soak wool or cloth in the aforementioned broth, and place that on the aching tooth, and place over it an iron heated until the iron reaches the pain of the tooth's root.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, for cautery with fire, you should attend to the thickness of the skin or flesh, and place it in the middle of some thickness so that the intensity of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then heat the cautery to the desired temperature, and place it on the tooth with your hand until the cautery is rubbed on it; do this several times as long as the pain persists either on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good broth due to the pressure of that cautery and hold it for an hour, then spit it out; this is how the cautery should be used.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize as much as you wish, according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the tube:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the Cauterization of Hemorrhoids.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hemorrhoids are full of phlegm and humors and do not respond to digestion through medicines and you wish to gently digest them, then heat the cautery according to this form, which has two open ends so that the smoke can escape; hold the cautery by one end and place it heated on the abscess once, or another time if necessary, until it reaches the root of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and afterwards leave it for three days and pause upon its edge within which is moistened what the fire has consumed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards take care of that which was touched and bandage it until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the cannula or cautery for this purpose is convenient.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On cauterizing the soreness of the voice and constricting the throat.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the venous moisture comes over the canal of the lung, and especially when this is due to coldness of complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and afterwards cauterize there the root of the navel in the place below.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful that you do not reach the navel with the cautery nor burn more than a little of the skin.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize there with another cautery at the junction of the neck on the last vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And let the cautery be needle-shaped according to the previous method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards take care of that with what was previously mentioned until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On cauterizing the disease of the lung and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease come from cold moisture and the patient does not have fever or consumption but has an old illness, then cauterize there with two cauteries on the collarbone in the lower and upper parts; and with another cautery at the middle location of the chest between two nipples; and let the cauteries be needle-shaped according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you want, let your cautery be sharp-pointed with the cautery that is called puncta, the shape of which precedes in the piercing of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let there be punctures within the edges for those; and then treat that with what is applied so that it may be healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And let there be the cautery having three steps for which the cautery is for that: in one instance you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cautery of the polyp, which is at the head of the helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the polyp is displaced due to lubricating humidity and does not return to its place because of its displacement within which it should be in the fluid it usually returns, and then by a slight movement it is displaced again as it must be, as we have testified, at that time you first reduce the dislocation, and then the patient is laid on his back or on his side; and then raise the part where the polyp is above the mentioned parts with your left hand if the joint is dislocated towards the inner part.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then use the cautery having two tips; and this is the form of it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the part so that it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cautery will come out with four tips after the cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And do this delicately according to the amount needed; and this is the form of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And in some cases it is appropriate according to this method and for the cauterizations .viii.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And therefore pause over the burning properly away from the salt, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and let the limb not be moved for some time until it is healed.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is to the upper parts and it is done thus, then cauterize over the muscle with a sharp cautery or pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the moisture is dispersed and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On Cauterization of the Stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When blood flows into the stomach, mix and stir the moisture until that substance of its composition and so multiply it in there, and if you continue the methods of treatment without confirming it, then have the patient lie on their back, extend their limbs and their belongings, and then cauterize with three cauteries: one cauterization below the feet by the length of a finger with a sharp cautery, and two cauteries below each side of the first cautery, so that the figure of the cauteries forms a triangle; and space them out so that they are not too close together to prevent rotting.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of two-thirds the thickness of the bone.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the figure of the cautery be according to this form without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this shall be a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let it be cauterized the stomach pricking at that which from this cauterization is frightened: and it is that you sense upon the stomach point according to the quantity that you wish one attempts, and then cauterize that one with cauterization on the points; and then treat that one with the treatment which precedes until he is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On Cauterization of the Afflicted Kidney.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain arises in the kidney due to coldness or humidity or excessive gas such that it is expelled through excessive evacuation from its usual condition, and the illness is treated as we have said without compression, then the patient should be placed on their back with their head raised, and you should apply three cauterizations by attempt over this area according to this form and quantity, placing them below the kidneys near the hypochondria, as shown in the position of a person lying down.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cauterization be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cauterizations be in length according to the right side of the body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not compress your hand while applying the cauterization.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of water adhering is half the length of the spine, and it is not more tightly fitted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, having already extended their belongings, and raise their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cauterization:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is within your capability to perform these cauterizations with cautery, when you possess subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And guard yourself that you do not proceed too quickly in the cauterization, and let it adhere to the thickness of all the vessel so that it adheres throughout the body and reaches into the pouches, for the vessel here is delicate; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the puncturing of an abscess of the kidney with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When you find an inflammation or abscess in the kidney and wish to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the kidney or in its tunica, then if it is in the flesh of the kidney, the patient will exhibit heaviness and pain without acute sharpness.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunica of the kidney, then the pain will be sharp and great, and often it exhausts the efforts of physicians to treat it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, have the patient lie on his back; and then identify the location of the abscess by probing; and subsequently use the cautery which resembles a reed, the form of which was described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that cautery until the entire vessel is consumed, until it reaches the sinus, until it causes healthy tissue to grow.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that patient with the treatment for other abscesses until he is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not suitable to use this method of cautery except by one whose study in the art of medicine is extensive, and who has known many illnesses; but even then, after experimenting a few times, be cautious with this procedure, for it is safer.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On Cauterizing Pustules.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Take the cauterizing sticks for pustules from the roots of artemisia as follows: you should take a stick about as long as your finger and as thick as your thumb.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse it in oil and heat it over the fire. Then cauterize with one cautery at the place where the clavicle meets the neck; and two small cauteries below that, slightly inclined toward the part under the beard; and two cauteries inclined between the fifth rib and the spine, slightly inclined towards the back parts; and another in the middle of the feet; and another above the stomach; and three at the rear parts; and one where it is between both shoulders; and two from the side of the feet below the cautery that is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And you should not apply the cautery to your own body, but rather have someone else do it for you.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And some ancient authors also say that sometimes men use a cautery made of iron resembling a needle and heat it to apply it to the place between the ribs until they reach the abscess, as we have said regarding the abscess in the testicle.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this puncture with the cautery there is no need for fear, for one dies immediately or an accident happens at the place where there is no healing.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cautery of the melesa.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the disease of the melesa as we have said about the treatment in the division and do not confer with your treatment, now you should cauterize according to three methods, all of which are surgical. The first is that you make three or four cauterizations along the length of the melesa according to the shape of the cauteries of the liver, the figure of which has been described previously.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And there should be a distance of the thickness of one finger or a bit more between each cauterization, and the method of the cautery should be the same method we have described for cauterizing the liver.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not compress your hand during the cauteries; and if the disease is above the thigh, it should be treated similarly.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another method of cauterizing, which is to ignite the cauteries vertically twice, as we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raise the shoulder, which is in line with the melesa where the left side of the diseased area lies.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation should be such that when you raise the shoulder along the length of the body, cauterizations are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert both vertically, ignite one of them, in the place where it penetrates the shoulder from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauterizations are completed.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with one cautery held vertically three times.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And so you should treat the cautery for pus that is lingering too long, for it is more convenient than the other causes previously mentioned in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cautery for hydropics.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterization is not used for hydropics except in certain specific cases.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the hydropic according to the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not conform to your treatment, then it is appropriate to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel and one cauteri over the stomach, and another cauteri over the liver, and another cauteri over the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and a cauteri on the right foot, and another cauteri over the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cauterization should be proportional to the severity of the condition.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And it is appropriate to use a moist cautery so that it takes effect over a long period of time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not delay the treatment of the illness appropriately with the cautery using what is necessary so that they are combined for two purposes, and it should be hastened with the aid of healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be in the shape of a nail as described above, and the one with which the back is cauterized should be in the shape of an olive according to its preceding form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On cauterization of the foot and other matters.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are affected by hydrophobia and are full of purulent water, it is necessary to cauterize them above the second toe, which is between the ring finger and the middle finger; raise your hand with the cautery but do not twist it there; then raise your hand, but do not return it completely, because the pus will drain.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery should be performed in this manner: Then apply two cauteries on both sides, and at each side let a cautery be made at the tip of the cautery knife.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cauteries should be according to the length of the limb: place one below the joint and the other at the lower part of the limb; and on each side two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound uncovered for some time so that some water can drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then treat with those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On cauterization of the abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdomen is affected by irritation and humidity that weaken its functions, which are digestive and retentive, located in the stomach and intestines, it should be treated with methods of treatment and not with conferring; at times the patient suffers from cauterization to exhibit strength, so you should cauterize it heavily over their stomach as previously described for stomach cauterization, using a circular cautery and four subtle cauteries around the navel in a circle, along with a subtle cautery shaped like a nail; or use two large cauteries on the alar region, or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you remove the excessive humors and the patient can tolerate water, then cauterize that area above the navel and over the bellies, and lightly apply two cauteries over the stomach and near the inguinal region, for this is a perfect cure from which you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter xxxiv.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the Cauterization of Ancient Hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When it is in the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or one caused by thick humors or corrupted humidity, and they are cured with water as we have said in the division but do not conform to the usual cure, then cauterize with three cauteries above the pus near the small and small triangular vertebrae, and two of these are placed above the navel.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that the patient’s stomach is not being properly stimulated and the food is not being digested, and the face of the patient becomes inflamed, then cauterize above the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; apply one cautery to the liver, and another to the spleen using a nail-shaped cautery; leave this cautery for some time, and subsequently treat so that they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter xxxv.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the Cauterization of Hysteria Near Its Removal.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove the uterus, then use cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Near the incision, apply the cautery to the removed uterus, and ensure that it reaches the place where the vein through which blood flows is located.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	In one or two days, for if the swelling persists, then cauterize each of them as we have recounted, and afterwards cure those with what applies from the medicines until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery over the wound, it is better for healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On Cauterizing Fistulas That Are Made in the Rear Part of the Body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the treatment we have recommended in its place, and the patient is afraid of this, let it be healed with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	When someone has a fistula in the rear part of their body that is old and discharges pus and corrupted moisture, then what is most worthy to do is to probe it with a fine instrument, and afterwards determine the depth of it with the previously mentioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then heat the cautery until it is like a red-hot needle.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then place the heated cautery into this fistula according to the extent to which the probe penetrated.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat the cautery inside until those corrupted substances are burned up completely in one instance or two or three, according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful not to burn the nerve or vein; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or intestine, then be cautious of all those places; and do this only when the fistula is in a fleshy location where you think it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, take care of the place inside so that it may be healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed and the substances are separated from it, and remain thus for a long time, then you will know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the substances do not adhere to the bone, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the vicinity of the corrupted bone, or falls from those causes of which there will be mention later.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cautery of wounds.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When pain in the wounds arises from rubbing or excessive inflammation, and thus the patient's condition is worsened, then it is appropriate to cauterize them with an instrument suitable for each wound, of which a description will be given later.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And wait a short while before cauterizing again, so that there will be three intervals between the cauterizations, and thus they will be more beneficial.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cautery of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When debility and softening of the bladder occur due to rubbing and excessive moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize it near where the pubic hair begins, on one side to the right and on the other to the left.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be proportional to the amount of moisture; and cauterize it once in the lowest part of both sides, or twice if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let it be a cautery of the nail as is prescribed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On Cauterization of the Navel.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is blood and moisture in the navel, and because of this it is forbidden to attempt anything [with it], and menstruation becomes corrupted due to it, and its provocation is delayed, and pain occurs due to its occurrence; therefore, the area should be cauterized three times around the umbilicus, as we have said regarding the cauterization of the bladder; or two cauteries above the place a little away from each other, or two cauteries, and it should be a cautery of the nail as has been prescribed.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On Cauterization of the Dislocation of the Joint.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture and pus are effused in the vicinity of the joint, and this is caused by reasons for its displacement from its place, and the sign of it is that the part is extended over the other when they are compared.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is treated where it hurts.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then you should cauterize the affected area near the joint with two cauteries in a circular manner, after you have marked around the part as it is rotated, and so that the part falls in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let it be the cautery whose form precedes in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries using a large olive-shaped cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be performed according to the quantity of the spicitude of all the wound; and then treat that part which needs healing.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLI.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the part of the joint, and its cause is friction and humidity, the patient is treated with what we have mentioned and does not conform to other methods; at this point, it is necessary to purge the patient of thick humors using foul pills or artificial ones or similar remedies; then cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either cauterize with combustible medicines, or cauterize with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It should be done according to two known methods: one of which is that you cauterize that area over the part of the joint with three triangular cauteries as follows; and do it with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cauterization should be the width of the thickness of a finger, and if the cauteries are olive or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	But in some cases, the cauteries should be on top of the middle location above the joint so that there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize with a circle whose shape precedes the cautery for the dislocation of the joint, such that the circle encompasses and burns the entire wound.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cautery when pain is attached to the joint and does not extend into the surrounding tissue.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	If it is spread inside the wound, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the wound above the place to which you will direct the malice that is the pain; and with one cauterization on the nail for four days a little beyond the fleshly part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery cuts, and its depth is according to the quantity of the sharpness of the bone.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the malice you will direct that the pain is spread in the place near the said soles of the feet, then cauterize there where you will with a cautery at three points or four or more if you need it.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the malice you will direct that the pain is below the navel near the wound, then cauterize there with one cutting cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And guard yourself in all cauterizations that you do not end with the cautery until you burn a nerve or large artery, and that by this you harm the patient badly or cause contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen one and another of those who cauterized on the nail and ended the cauterization, and the bed of fire swelled inside until the tumor reached the foot, and the fire perforated and corrupted the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And as a result of a severe abdominal injury, and from that death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise ones said about the cauterization of each cautery of which this is the method: make it resemble a circle of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and let it be above the skin opening according to the thickness of a date bone or slightly less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And in that circle make another third; and let the space which is between them be the quantity of the thumb’s width; and let those circles be divided into two parts; and let the length of those cords be one or two thumbs, and fasten those margins of iron decently prepared in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	And then set it alight in the fire so that it glows and throws sparks, and then place it over the part of the wound, the malath[colic or pain] placed upon the skin.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And thus cauterize that area three times in one session.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be for three days; then apply a bandage to that area and leave the wound open for more than ten days; and then treat that area with medicine until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Al-Bucasis says: Oh, sons [of my disciples], we have seldom used this type of cautery out of fear of its consequences, and because few have we found those who are knowledgeable about it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But for the very cauteries, to him who endures them, and find the place of it [the site of application] on the body.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But cautery with adhering medicines is such that you should make two circles having a perforated armula in which the opening of the iron door can fit; let the length of the sides be according to their nature, one or two walnuts in size.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between each one is the quantity of the thickness of a finger; and let them be divided below and above, and let them contain each other according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then pause over the place of the wound, and let the patient sit on the lap, and take your hand over the place of the water; and then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and let the quality of that be as little fire gradually increasing, and in that for the quantity of one hour, and let the patient endure the biting and the adjustment thereof — for that torment is biting as well as burning — until such time as the biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away the hot water from all the wound with cool water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave that for three days and pause over the edge of it until the blackness of the adjustment is removed, and leave that for some days, and it will run with pus; this is last in aid.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that with dressings until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends to the chest or the armpit, treat it with the statue as is done for the wound equally.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and for a fire that is not extinguished from both parts one, and mix them and pause in a new bowl of which the lower part is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into the treatment.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And pause below the bottom of the bowl another inverted bowl, and pour over that alkali and living fire with cool water which rises by one finger, and when you press them with your hand for good pressure, and leave the hole through which the sharp water descends from the lower part to the inverted bowl.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then adjust all that water, and add it to another living cause and another renewed alkali, because at that moment it will have great sharpness, which is administered in many medical operations and in cauterizing other members, for this operation makes use of fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And for some medicines with which one is cauterized widely, such as vinegar and honey mixed with natron and a cause with soap, so that they are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Galen recounts the operation and cure for treating pain in the sciatic nerve and vein of a patient from the ancients, and he praises it greatly as being excellent, saying that no other treatment is necessary, because it heals with one application as described, since the method involves bathing and using medicine.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be taken in a vinegar solution, and if vinegar is not available, fresh figs should be used; mix them with a little flour and apply to the affected area of the leg, or to the buttock, or to the hip, and bind it.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it remain for three hours or for the amount of time that the patient estimates as necessary for the adjustment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then place him in a bath, and when his body is relaxed, move him to the ground, for the pain will cease and he will be healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not necessary to use cauterization with these medicines except after the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But Galen says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's horn, it benefits the patient greatly; and let the cauterization be done in this way: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and the affected area.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Take a dried goat's bladder and fill it with water until it becomes carbonized; then place it on the wool and spread it out so that it is extended.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And continue doing this, and do not stop until the sensation of biting reaches the joint and the pain subsides.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cauterization is called cow cauterization.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On Cauterization for Pain in the Thighs.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	In some cases, pain in the thighs is caused by various reasons, such as falling or impact or excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, by the infusion of moist and corrosive matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterization is not used for any other condition but this specific one, which is caused by the infusion of corrosive matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, after evacuating the harmful substance with fine pills and similar remedies, place them on the thighs where the pain is, three lines according to its width. Then apply five cauteries in each line or more, depending on the tolerance of the patient and the strength of the treatment.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let the cauterization be performed with pointed cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a central nail-shaped cauterization as follows:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On Cauterization for the Beginning of Chilblains.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	This disease often affects young children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that it occurs on their structure around the navel with elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you find in the last vertebra of the back and its nodes that it already begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize that spot with a cautery in the shape of a circle as follows:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that you apply the cautery over the entire part of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want to, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two lines or three away from it.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close together.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And immediately treat the area so that it heals as we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But be careful not to administer the cautery in areas of inflammation that are caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by the friction of humors that are distributed to each part of the body, and when pains occur in the feet, it is customary for doctors to refer to this as gout properly.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore, when gout caused by friction is treated with the method of treatment and the pains do not subside, then use cautery to relieve them.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you cauterize that place of evacuation in the vicinity of the joint at the breastbone with cauterization.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let the cautery be in the shape of an olive, which is as follows:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make a puncture on the breast fascia, then proceed with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains rise into the joints or other articulations, and this happens frequently, then cauterize each joint with three cauteries or four from all sides with this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you must use these cauteries and find them necessary, then cauterize that area but do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery before, only around the circumference of the cautery.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains rise into the joint and the second area, then administer the cauteries as we have said in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains remain only in the muscles and are called cramping, then puncture around the edges of the muscles as it revolves, puncturing in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the said areas, then puncture around the edges of the muscles at each node and on the joint of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains rise near any of the joints in the shoulders or muscles, then cauterize them from all sides with the assistant's help.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the malady without proper regimen and reception of medicines, for if good regimen is followed and the harmful substances are evacuated with this cautery, it will be healed, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On cauterizing fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When you suspect a fracture in the groin and intestines, and the bowels are exposed before the cloth, at this point it is necessary to instruct the patient to fast on that day and use laxatives so that the opening from the abdomen closes.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then have the patient lie down on your lap with their back up against you, and instruct them to raise their legs so that either the cloth or the bowels are exposed.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return to the patient and indicate with your hand where the fracture is on the bone of the pubis, marking its end which resembles half a circle at the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then prepare the cautery, which has the following form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	such that it is round and emits sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then return the bowels or cloth to their original position, and then place your hand over the area to prevent them from escaping.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And once you have placed the patient between the sheets and left one sheet over them, another should be placed under their buttocks, and another under their feet, while they lie on their back.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery on that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and do so until you feel the bone of the pubis in the middle; repeat this several times if you did not succeed on the first attempt to locate the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe wisely the condition of the bowel at the time of your cautery, that you do not burn that bowel such that it does not bring about death or some great harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And be aware that when you perform the cautery, do not touch the bone, do not proceed with your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be gentle according to their age and size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And take care of the site of the cautery for three days, bandaging it so that the fire scar heals.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And subsequently take care of that with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the site is sealed and the wound healed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is necessary to restrict the patient's diet according to the duration of the treatment period during which the inflammation of the abdomen occurs, and that the bowel does not protrude due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And subsequently, when it is time to remove the dressing after forty days, administer it carefully and properly, and keep that area bandaged for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let them be restricted from work and overeating food and drink, and from speaking loudly, for when they follow this complete regimen of healing, they will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will describe the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if you do not want them to spread, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size; let it be as much as is taken from the cord, as one third of it. And subsequently treat that as we have said, and it will not be adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some of the earlier writers said that rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, as it is marked with a template:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and a line is drawn which you follow latitudinally on the abdomen above the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand with a nail-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is faster and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the Cauterization of Torticollis.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When you find in some members due to falling or striking there is pain that persists for a long time and does not improve with medication, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery for each member should be according to its size and smallness, its strength and weakness, and the location of the torticollis and the pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If he is healed by the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on it. For it is customary for such pains to be punctured from one member to another nearby one, so you must achieve this with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the Cauterization of Leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some cases of leprosy are greatly helped by cautery, but rarely when the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so when you want to cauterize that patient, consider whether the leprosy is commencing and can be cured with what we have mentioned in the division and do not say it will not happen, and if you fear for the patient that the corruption may spread throughout their body and complexion, then cauterize him on his head with five cauteries: one at the middle of the head, and another lower down; both above the ears; and one behind, over the nape or back of the neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And lastly your hand should apply the cautery a little inside where it presses upon the bone, thereby displacing the scabs, so that the expulsion of thick vapors may be facilitated from there; and cauterize over the wound as is necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy has already spread over the body and is clearly manifest, then you should cauterize it with those cauteries which we have mentioned at the beginning; and apply one cautery on the tip of the nose, two cauteries on each cheek, two on each cervical vertebra, six on the dorsal vertebrae, a large one near the lumbar region, another on the buttocks, two on each thigh, one on each ankle, two on each elbow, one on each wrist, and two on each calf muscle; cauterize it also over all the joints of the hands and feet, as well as on each heel, and at the axillae.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves that run over the heel so as not to burn them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And in some cases it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the little toe and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you apply cauteries appropriately, the more helpful and beneficial they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as others would, because the body is already numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is appropriate that the cauteries be large or small according to the members and joints as dictated by the nature of the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Regarding the treatment with cautery, use flour of oats mixed with honey. For the other cure, ensure it leads to healing.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the cautery for stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a limb is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters but does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb limb using cautery appropriate to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let the heat of the cautery be moderate, entering slightly beneath the surface.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And subsequently treat that area with an ointment so that it may heal.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes a cautery is applied to a numb area that extends deeper into the muscles and vertebrae, as well as along the course of the nerves that control that limb, to alleviate the numbness.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not proceed with this unless you are knowledgeable about the anatomy of the limb and the course of the nerves throughout the moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cautery for wounds that become paralyzed.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When an old wound does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you should cauterize over that area using a cautery slightly heated according to the quantity and nature of the tissue until the whiteness and color of the wound are alleviated, and its color changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And subsequently treat that area with flour of oats and lentils mixed with rose oil and leaves of arnica, and either dove blood or swallow blood, taking an equal part of each and thoroughly mixing them together. Then apply a cloth soaked in this mixture to the affected area until it heals.
Capitol .l.	Chapter I.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On cauterizing ulcers.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize that part with a cauterizing agent in the form of a circle around it as it appears.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise ones say that it should be cauterized with the last cauterization in the middle area; but I have not seen this done, for I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have seen this happen in some cases.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is safer to cauterize around the affected area in a circular manner as we have said, or in other words, use cautery around it.
Capitol .li.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On cauterizing abcesses.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an abscess is delayed in maturation due to excessive moisture in that area, or because of the patient's condition, such as being old and weak, having little blood, or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize around it with small punctures using a cautery; and afterwards it will mature more quickly.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to pierce the abscess with a cautery, then choose a cautery that is suitable for this purpose; and place it in the middle of the abscess until it penetrates the tissue.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is applied to a location that is further away to spare the arm from excessive pain; and then care for it until it heals.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LII.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On Cauterization with Corrosives.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosives are a wandering corruption in the limb, which corrodes as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, when you see the corrosive in a place where it can withstand cautery with fire, then ignite and cauterize small and large areas as is appropriate in the place where the corrosion is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And proceed to cauterize it from all sides until you eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause for it to remain.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then dress it for three days, and apply poultices to the cauterized areas thrice daily with an oil mixture until all the scars are eradicated and all the corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat it with substances that promote flesh growth.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days you see that healthy flesh is growing where there is no corruption, it is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains in the corrupted areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And some corrosives are treated with sharp medicines, for these are suitable as an alternative to cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But cauterization with fire is more quickly effective.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already mentioned the treatment of it with sharp medicines in the division, and therefore use that when you find it necessary.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On cauterization of wounds and other similar cases.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Most often, in the parts below the knee where a condition called clau maladie occurs, which is caused by thick and hardened flesh that affects the foot; and one should cauterize it in two ways, namely with fire and with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	The cauterization with fire is done by heating the cauterizing instrument concave in shape like a ring, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the clau condition throughout all parts, and it should be finely polished.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place the heated instrument on the clau, and then move your hand with the cauterizing tool around the perimeter of the clau until the cauterization reaches the depth of the clau.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let it be for three days until it begins to form scabs.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a poultice made of crushed wild mallows mixed with salt to it, and leave the poultice on for one night, as this will help eradicate it from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a generative flesh ointment until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and often happens on the surface of the body, especially in the muscles and skin, then you should administer cauterization with hot water. This is done by taking a small tube made of earthenware or iron or ring-shaped, and place it on the clau; then pour a small amount of hot water into the tube and hold your hand around it tightly, revolving it with compression from all sides, and apply the edge of the tube to the root of the clau, allowing the hot water to penetrate through the root of the clau; wait for the malady to be affected by the heat of the water for about an hour, then remove it, as the clau along with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus place one against the other until you come upon all of them in their proper order in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And place next to the care of those abscesses that the roots of the nails have been eradicated with the help of those medicines which cause the flesh to grow.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the cautery for tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you find a tremor due to irritation of the nerves or from fever caused by irritation, or from some similar cause, it is then necessary for you to cauterize that area with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra one cauterization; and at the joints of the legs, and over the stomach, use an olive-shaped cauterization.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor subsides and the health improves quickly from the irritation of the illness.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LIV.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cautery for accidental injuries to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there are accidental wounds in the body that have become pus-filled and cracked, formed from thick, corrupted matter; therefore, at the beginning when they appear, it is necessary to cauterize over the entire fistula with a fine cautery made of myrtle wood, the tip of which is exposed to fire; or with the long thorns of erestologia; or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize immediately at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and if not done so, the excess matter that causes these issues will be disrupted, and thus they heal from them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it is necessary that this be done immediately after evacuation and phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LX.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On cauterization of blood flow due to accidental cutting of an artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	If the flow of blood from an artery that has been cut is due to a plague that originated inside, or due to the beginning of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and similar cases, it is difficult to remedy this.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	When such a situation occurs, quickly apply your hand to the opening of the artery, and press on it with enough strength to hold the clot inside until the blood flow stops, and do not let it escape.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place in the fire olive coals, both small and large, for many pieces, and blow on them until they are ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one of those coals, either small or large depending on the location and condition in which the artery is ruptured, and place it quickly over the vein after you have removed your hand, so that the cauterization stops and restricts the blood.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove your hand and extract the cauterization tool, then take another coal quickly from those coals which are prepared in the fire, and continue doing this one after another until the blood flow is stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerve that is here, and ensure it does not cause other harm.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible then to restrain the blood, especially when the artery is large, unless one employs one of four methods: either by cauterization as we have mentioned, or by extraction, because when it is extracted, the extremities are burned and the blood is restrained; or let it be bound with astringent medicines, or let it rest upon medicines whose virtue is to restrict the blood; and they should be strengthened with poultices with moderate pressure.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	And let him who administers moderate binding with bandages and compression with cloths or by the position of burning materials and similar methods not hurry but proceed slowly.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	And if this happens to someone and there is no doctor present or medicine, then gently place the index finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand that due to great constriction within, the blood remains in the upper part of the wound, and the finger should not be moved from the artery; and above the artery it should be sprinkled with cold water until the blood is congealed and thickened; and then proceed with cauterization or medicine as necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and puncture and wound treatment and of phlebotomy and of wounds and their similar conditions.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter about every illness in which cauterization with fire is appropriate and with burning medicine, and the occasions and causes for it, and the instruments necessary for the forms of cauterizations; and I have arranged the chapters on the superiority of the head among the parts of the body.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	In this procedure described in this chapter by that method, may God bless the one asking about it, at the time concerning what they have asked.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, listen, son, and learn that in this chapter it is by fear as it is in the first chapter on cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for this reason, it is necessary to be in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many times there is evacuation of blood or pus, which can endanger life due to the application of heat on a vein or incision over an abscess or opening of an exit or purging of a plague or extraction of a splinter or stone and similar procedures.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And with all of those actions, accompany fear and trembling, and in the worst case of their danger, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that upon you does not fall what is mentioned in the context of danger, for some times such cases can be caused by methods used by people dealing with many types of illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And among them are some who become enraged by their illness and die quickly because of the severity of what they find in their illness, and due to the length of their illness, and this illness brings fear which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among them is one who gives away his possessions and says, "I hope for health from this," while their actual illness is fatal.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore, you must not consent to those who come to you with this method; and your caution should be greater than your greed and rapacity; and do not assume any reason for it beyond certain knowledge that confirms what affects you, and to which a reputable succession of practice attests.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	For the treatment of all your patients, make a prognosis and indication as to which one is likely to be cured, for in that you will have assistance in acquiring fame and reputation, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, children, may God inspire your mind and not take from you direction and protection, for this is in His power.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have arranged this chapter distinctly by chapters as it follows the chapter on cauterization, concerning the treatment of the head among other things, so that you may be pleased with what you seek regarding this and what you need.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often affects children shortly after birth when the nurse presses too hard on the child's head.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it happens for hidden causes that are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have seen this illness only in children; and in all those whom I saw it led to death, and thus it appeared to me as a fatal condition.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the size of his head was so enlarged that he could not control it due to the greatness of his head, and before long the moisture increased within until it caused death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is either accumulated between the skin and the bone, or it is accumulated below the bone on the skull.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For when the operation is to be performed and the moisture lies between the bone and the boil, which is small, you should cut in the middle of the head with a slit in length, and let the length of this slit extend two fingers' breadth where the moisture flows, and this is the form of the spatum:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture is more increased and the boil is larger, then at this time there should be two slits according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is deeper than the bone, the sign of this is that you see the commissures of the head covered all around and the water is squeezed out when you press it with your finger at the sides but not from underneath.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	You should cut in the middle of the head with three slits according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	and immediately the incision should extract all the moisture; and then dress the slits with cloths and plasters; and subsequently apply poultices of oil and vinegar over them for five days, and then loosen the bandage and treat the wound with lint and ointments, and dress the head symmetrically; and eat food that is dry with little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which you should consider according to the size of the boil and the collection of water, for sometimes it may be in the occipital region, or in the front part, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the boil appears and the swelling of the water, and do this according to what is best possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and avoid excessive bleeding, for the illness may worsen due to that loss of blood along with the evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On the incision of the arteries near the ears, called hilasseysse.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Second.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When I come to certain carbuncles or boils on the thighs or in the genitals, and if it is old and not responsive to treatment with medicines, then at that time the last resort is to cut into those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore, when you want to incise those arteries, have the patient raise his hand and rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries become visible; then secure the patient's neck with a cloth; and examine where the vein can be pressed; these locations are near the ears, but they may vary in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then press on the artery with your finger, and then incise each one with a sharp scalpel, piercing into the bone, and do this across the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the scalpel below the artery and cut it at the points where the incisions are above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, for when an artery is cut, the blood flows out in a pulsating manner, often spouting frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear upon inspection, then measure three finger breadths from the ear, and then press with your finger to find it, and make an incision into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	In order to extract and treat pus from a wound, take one ounce of vinegar, and it is light enough to pour out like wheat or bran, and all this is according to the quantity which appears appropriate for the strength of the patient and the fullness of the vein.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and if there remains any cause of pus above the bone, now incise that so that it does not become an abscess from cauterization.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and afterward care for it with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of veins that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When it happens that someone suffers from migraines or acute headaches due to excessive humidity in the body and qualities in the veins of the temples, or if they are similar severe conditions, and treatment with medical methods does not provide relief, then we resort to these diseases the extraction of veins in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction of those veins is that the patient shaves the hair which is on the temples; and identify the visible vein in the temple as it is shown by its pulse, and it is hidden from most people due to the force of friction.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then tie the head of the patient with some cloth; and afterward rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the vein becomes clearly visible.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And now you take the spatula which has this form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you peel the membrane in such a way that you reach the artery; and there remove it and extract it to the appropriate places until you extract it from the membrane and reveal those tunics which are underneath, from every part.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is fine, now wrap it at its extremity with a ligature, and then cut off a part according to the quantity by which the ends of it are stretched out and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, for if they are not thus divided the blood would not rise.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then remove the blood from the wound in quantity of one ounce up to three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, now make sure you tie it in two places with a very strong thread or cords at a distance, and do not allow it to become putrid before the healing of the wound and prevent the flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut away the excess which is between two ligatures; and do this either at that hour or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone with a knife cautery until the ends of it are divided, and this will serve as that work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to do this when the patient has a fever or is of hot complexion; for cautery is one of those causes that help to dry up excessive moisture, and therefore it is better in such conditions.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	Concerning the extraction of arteries, ensure that the place where it will be done is clean and proper, and let them lie on a decently prepared poultice, and nearby have medicines ready that cause flesh to grow and bandages so that it may be healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working some other place bleeding occurs from the artery, then you should proceed to constrict that blood, either with cautery or by filling the place with cloth, and press your hand in so that the blood may be restrained.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes are present to you, then press your hand over the place until the blood is congealed, and cover the area with water of extreme coldness until the pain subsides, and bind it as necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is most important in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two cloths, after you have marked both places with a needle, and then place some ignited material inside until it reaches the bone and severs the vein at two points, so that you can stretch what is between its extremities, as they are not fully consolidated by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two cloths should be noted. 
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the sharpness is such that two knives are better, for if as sharp as two knives approaches each fracture, and do not cut through the flesh too quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is any swelling in those areas, the heat of the fire is applied to them and the flesh is cut away quickly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this method is better than all methods and faster.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space between two knives be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of sharp and acidic tears from the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When such acidic tears occur, and the cause is from those veins which are above the head on the outside, and if there is no clear reason for the treatment with medicine, sometimes the face of the patient turns red, and a sensation as if ants were crawling in their forehead can be felt, and the eyes are so weakened that even their eyelashes can barely be seen, and the eyelids are scorched by the sharpness of the tears. The ancient practitioners used to treat such cases with this procedure without delay.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to pluck the hairs that are on their forehead, and then cut three incisions equally spaced according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is about two fingers: one incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little behind the movement of the tears that flow through the lacrimal duct, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And guard against the beginning of the arteries, which are on both sides, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between each incision is the quantity of three such adjustments.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of prepared sponge or dried cloth with which you can dry the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatula between two sharp points, which is the shape of the incision as follows:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the first part of the template to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise from there all the tissue that is between two incisions at the suture which is on the bone, and then make this median incision to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then place this spatula and insert another instrument called a knife, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, into the first incision.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the sharp side on the flesh and adjacent tissue, and the blunt side against the bone, and insert it until you reach the median fissure, and dissect all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	But ensure that the incision continues to appear on the tissue, and then make this in the median fissure to the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the flow of blood is equal in quantity, press the places where clotted blood has collected.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place small pieces of old wood in each fissure, and apply powder mixed with vinegar and oil on them, and bandages so that no abscess forms by cauterization.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day remove the bandage and administer great infusion of hot water or terebinth, and afterwards treat with an ointment of basilicon and rose oil and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of tumors by catharsis and the expulsion of humors descending from the inner parts of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is acute and continuous bleeding from catharsis, and the humors of the patient are exhausted and small, and their care shows weakness, and the eyelids are ulcerated with hair loss in their place, and there is sharp pain and extreme drying at the forehead, then you should understand from these symptoms that the matter and catharsis do not come except from veins proceeding from inner parts.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for these conditions is as follows: Command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make a small incision at the middle of the forehead (beginning from the midpoint between the left temple and the right temple; ensure that this incision reaches the bone; extend your hand from the temples which are far apart due to chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then apply a mixture between the two edges of the incision with yellow wax or strips of cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply dry powdered herbs mixed with wine and oil on top so that it does not lead to an infected wound.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you remove this and see that the abscess has already diminished, then scrape the bone where new flesh begins to grow, and afterwards treat it with a drying regimen that promotes the growth of new flesh. For example, take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colocynth, mix them together, and make a plaster from it to be applied to these wounds where new flesh is growing.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the treatment of what affects the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Any cause that affects the ears is one of four types: it may be a mineral stone or something resembling a stone, such as iron or wood; or it may come from a plant, such as thorns or beans; or it may be a fluid-like substance, such as water and vinegar or similar liquids; or it may be some kind of animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when a stone is lodged in the ear or any other cause similar to those that do not adhere or are embedded in the ear, place the ear towards the sun, and if you see the stone, then administer some drops of violet oil or sesame oil, and shortly after induce sneezing with appropriate conditions, and plug the nose at the moment of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place around the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear towards the upper parts, as this treatment is often effective for such causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not expelled, then administer an extract with the instrument called gesti epicicarios, which is a subtle tool of this form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is expelled with the instrument, that is good; and if not, then administer an extract along with a slight amount of repeated application.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not expelled by these methods, then make a tube of reed and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal, and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that only the tube remains open.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	From there extract the vein with strong traction, for troops watched as we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If it is not forcibly done in this manner, then take a thin thread or a piece of equipment with which birds are caught, a small amount, and place that at the end of the vein, and then wrap around that knot gently placed.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert it into the ear canal with ease, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it is not forcibly done for all the causes that we have recounted, then you should proceed to cut in front of where it becomes an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of cutting it is that you first lance the vein called sephasica and extract the blood according to the manner of its virtue, and then make a small incision between your fingers and turn the ear towards above, and make a slight cut at the edge of the ear where it is most pressed.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the cut be in a crescent shape until it reaches the stone, and when the stone is found, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; then close the cut quickly at that moment, and care for it until it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause lying in the ear is one of the gristles that grow and become inflamed, then administer the treatment and the extraction of it; but if you do not obey this method, then take fine wax as follows:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer the removal of that gristle which is lodged in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	If you do not want to use water when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor from the air, place it in various positions, and draw out therefrom with hooks or subtle gestures, or as we have said concerning incision, for the extraction is easier.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	In the water that has entered the ear, it is useful for the patient to use sneezing at the beginning with certain preparations, and fill one side of their ear with some old cotton, and place on the affected ear, if by this method it is expelled, good; but if not, now take small pebbles or stones according to the length of a finger, and heat those in the fire for a little while, and the patient should insert one of them into the ear canal and jump with one side of their body onto that stone and strike another stone on the stone inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Do not remove the stone until all the water has been expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And the water will be expelled in this way: take paper or wool, and place one end of it in the ear while holding the other end over fire until it is partially burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And place another piece of wool and do this as many times as necessary until all the water is expelled, and then probe it with a cannula as was said about the stone extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of an animal that has entered the ear, if it is a small creature, treat it similarly as we have said in the division; but if it is a larger one causing pain to the patient, then administer the extraction with gestures and hooks, and the cause of this is more urgent than all other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it with that which we have said in the division and in the tractate on distillations and do not confirm your treatment, then it is necessary to expose the ear to the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore, if any cause of the worms appears, then extract it with gentle movements or subtle instruments; but if no cause appears, then take a cannula that is narrow below and wide above, and this is its shape:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the delicate end into the ear according to the amount that you can bear; then suck with force using that instrument several times until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if you do not obey this instruction, then pack and seal around the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations that have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, which you will find described in the tractate on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And make your application with the instrument through which you pour medicinal oils into the ear, and this is its shape:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or ivory, narrow at the bottom, with a small tube and a flat top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And it should be like pressing against the concavity of the cannula where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take a reed and wrap its end neatly with cloth, then pour oil into the concavity of the ear or juice from some herb, or any of these medicines into the cannula — which is in the ear —, and then insert the reed with the cloth at the top and press it gently so that the oil is expelled into the concavity of the hearing and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And let that which is to be inserted into the ear be first heated over the fire a little.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause for which you will distill into the ear is not too rough, for medicines for the ear do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of blocked ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes infants are born from their mothers' wombs with unopened ears, and this also happens in some adults, where the ear canal is blocked by infection or flesh growing there; and this blockage sometimes occurs at the entrance of the ear canal, which cannot be seen clearly, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs at the entrance of the ear, which cannot be seen clearly, is in the most difficult conditions to heal.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that case where you can see clearly, place the ear of the patient in the sun and observe it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see a blockage that is apparent, open it with a fine spatula of this form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it where the width is small, of which one part is sharp and the other is not; and the spatula should be of two thin sides so that it does not cause injury to the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the blockage is due to flesh growing in the ear or in the ear canal, then use fine scissors and carefully cut away all the excess flesh inside.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if there is an obstruction in the ear canal, then take a thin reed and heat that in the fire for a little while, and then place that into the ear canal.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you feel an obstruction with what the patient identifies as easy to reach due to hearing difficulty, apply pressure to expel it; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place in the ear a piece of cloth according to the quantity of the mass that you have wrapped in Egyptian cotton; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the lesion; or take something and dip it in rose water and sprinkle it with finely ground powder and use it; and if you see the ear already inflamed, then you should remove what was there and replace it with another piece wrapped in wax mixed with olive oil, until the inflammation subsides; and then continue treatment until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if there is a flow of blood, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that stops the bleeding, which is described in the chapter on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of inflammation that occurs on the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Inflammation that occurs on the eyelids of the eyes is sometimes moist, and at other times it is dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you should have those available in small jars or containers, and grind them finely from their roots, and then apply them as a powder to the affected areas.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If there is pain and bleeding from a vein, then at that hour you should cauterize those places with a cautery of fine antimony.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is near the incisions and troops that return when there remains some cause for them; and when they are cauterized with fire, those causes are consumed and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for a condition that affects the eyelids.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Recurrent causes are hidden in the eyelids, some of which resemble a severe condition in their strength and hardness, and therefore this severity is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an aggregation of thick humidity in the eyelid, both below and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation in such cases is to consider at that moment whether the condition has arisen from what appears on the eyelid and is spread throughout; and the cause of it is superficial.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, apply something over that place along the length of the fissure, and then carefully remove it from all parts with ease until it is clean, and then suspend it with an ointment and cover it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	However, if you are not prepared for the initial treatment and pus penetrates the eyelid through small incisions, then this should not be noted as any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the condition is severe, then you adjust it with stitches; and take care of it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is mild, it will not cause harm because the warmth of treatment restores and heals it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is inclining towards the inner parts of the eyelid, you should lift up its surface, then hold the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a needle, another that you need from the beginning, and press it from all sides, and if the eyelid because of incision is lengthened, this do not notice in any way.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And after the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with something that heals so that it may be healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the treatment around the eye above the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Swelling occurs in the area above the eyelids, mainly affecting children, worsening their wounds and causing them great pain; they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears continuously flow from their eyes.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And because of this, you see them lying with their faces covered all the time, and they sleep with their faces down; and above their lower eyelids are moist eyebrows, which have been covered by inflammation, and there is a clear sign of swelling in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel swelling inside.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And there is a method of treatment where the patient places their head in your lap, and you place a cloth over them and make a circle according to the quantity that contains blood from all parts, and then place it on top and press with your fingers all around so that swelling aggregates at the center of the circle, and then apply moisture to the center of that area using a spatula inserted into a small incision along its length, but ensure that this incision is not larger than the one made in phlebotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	In the middle of the incision you should cut the cartilage completely until you reach the pleura, for in major operations the pleura is exposed by a rupture according to the form of the rib cavity.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract that which you wrapped in the cloths between your fingers at the parts from inside until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to probe into the rupture so that you do not reach the lung, and avoid doing that.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if the pleura does not appear at the beginning of the rupture, then probe into the rupture slightly with ease until you encounter the pleura; and then extract it as we have said; and then dip cloths in water and vinegar and place them over the area and press them down with dust.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And some people use salt and place it in the deepest part of the rupture so that what remains is dried by this humidity.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an abscess occurs in the area, then treat it with gentle plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On the methods of examining the lung.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When there are growths on the membranes of the lung that extend below the natural hairs and when they cause issues such as continuous tears and inflammation of the membranes, leading to damage to the lung known as examining or touching the lung, it is treated in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with sharp medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization; or it is done by incision and suturing; or through canulas, as I will explain.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so cut that you place the edge of the wound in the suture; then turn the upper eyelid with your left hand, and if it turns well, it is good; but if not, insert a needle into one of the follicles below the eyelid, and pierce the needle through the root from above, and this should be near the margin of the eyelid where the hair grows, near the hair, and draw out the pus to the upper parts with the eyelid, and turn that one towards the light.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then apply to the inner part of the eyelid below the hair, adjacent to the lower canaliculus into the minor lacrimal; and then extract the pus and place below the eyelid small particles of cork or cloth, and then bandage over the eyelid with a pad, and it should be like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it must be the figure according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, for this is varied in people, since there are those whom you need to cut away a great deal from the eyelid according to how much the eyelid has been softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then apply to the canaliculus along the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the lower canaliculus into the minor lacrimal.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fissure is near the natural hair as it is the thickness of the king. 
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Take the ounce and place it in one of the two angles of the collarbone, then scrape that area entirely. Next, fit the incision with the edges of both lips using fine wool grease, and clean away the blood. If you want to do this, apply what is excessive from the ointments over two eyebrows for certain viscous reasons, but if not, do not worry about it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Remove the stitches from the ointments after three or four days, and then take care of it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, remove the dressing without stitches and treat it with something that dries and constricts, for the eyelid is elevated due to the sealing of the wound and the aggregation of blood; however, stitching is better. This is what the ancients recommended.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But let there be careful attention to the wound itself, and it is of good practice, and not from fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method for treating it, which involves marking on the eyelid in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and then lifting the eyelid by three uncia units separated and gathered according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible to do this with the uncia units, now take a needle with thread and place it in the center of the figure, and insert the other ointment near the larger lacrimal gland, and the second ointment near the smaller lacrimal gland, and adjust between these threads the ointments evenly. Then lift your hand with equal elevation and lift the entire area marked as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Next, bring the two edges of the wound together with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If an abscess occurs in your incision or wound, you should cover that abscess with wax or something similar, and then bandage it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And in some cases, if the eyelid is involved and its hairs are turned inward, then you should proceed as we have described for incisions; but suturing is more artificial in such cases.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Disinfecting with reeds is done in the following manner:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and this involves turning the eyelid and dissecting the area as I have recounted; then, using artifice, make two reeds or thin sticks whose length should be according to the length of the eyelid and whose width should be less than the width of the pupil.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already made incisions at the extremities of each section, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then apply each reed gently to what is excessive on the eyelid of the eye, and tightly bind the reeds in each section, and leave it for several days, because the irritated tissue will die off and be rejected, and new tissue will form until they fall out on their own.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then cut it with scissors, and afterwards treat the wound until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When it is healed, the eyelid is raised and the hairs no longer irritate.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the method for making two reeds that you should prepare in this manner:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and the length and width should neither be more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the elevation of hairs in the groin with forceps when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are unnatural, hard, rough, and prickly in the groin, then you should take fine forceps and place them on that part gently and carefully, adjusting the extremities of the hair so each is grasped subtly.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the forceps be about the width of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you prepare another fine forceps briefly, and grasp the extremities of that hair if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient in a suitable position in the light, and let it be close to the sun so that your work is clear, for this is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the grasped hair which requires extraction, and make it penetrate quickly until you pull it out from above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair out from above and insert it into an alcohol solution, and let there be one or two or three hairs and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand away so that the hair is completely removed along with the alcohol solution from the root of the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if the alcohol solution is drawn out and the hair is not removed, pull the alcohol solution away from the surrounding area with the forceps you have prepared for that purpose, so that it is fully extracted along with the excess tissue.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	From the wound of the eye, one should first remove any foreign bodies and fragments from it, and then allow the edges of the wound to heal together with clamps for two or three days, until the hair adheres at its place and grows over that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is too short, then you should take a longer hair from among the natural hairs and place it there, or let it grow until it reaches an appropriate length, and then lift that hair.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of a boil that appears on the upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When a boil appears in the eye and causes contraction of the eyelid when it is closed, either to the right or to the left side, due to poor healing of a wound, surgery, or cautery, it is called leporine. This boil may be either natural or accidental, caused by poor healing of wounds, surgeries, or cauterizations, or similar neglect in treatment.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the procedure is that you should cut open that contraction and separate its edges, and place between them a piece of linen cloth, and bind it until it heals.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not advisable to use treatments that dry out or constrain the area; for if you do this, the boil will return worse than before and never heal properly.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use treatments that soften and mollify, such as fenugreek; boil it in water along with its seeds or juice from the plant, which is dissolved in some oil, then soak a piece of cloth in this mixture and apply it to the area.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The treasure of your cure is that you should pierce every bud that is not consolidated according to the form at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have mentioned is nothing but a correction of the halezacrati that does not return to its original form as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the treatment of ehacrati which is performed on the lower eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This alzacratium which is made on the lower eyelid, which is properly called alzacratium; and it is of two kinds, one natural, the other accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	The accidental one is caused by trauma or by a cut or by cautery or by other similar causes.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation is that you take a needle with which to make a double thread, and place it in the flesh, and pass it from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then stretch the flesh at the parts above with the needle and cut along it with a broad spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if the figure of the eyelid returns as it should, that is good; but if not, take a rod and place it in the cleft, and with it convert the eyelid, and sew the two openings on the side of the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two fissures be at the two corners of the incision you have made where they meet, and let them form an angle so that when they come together they make a proper figure.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	This is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And cut the flesh there in the amount equal to the length of the upper eyelid before it, that which will heal as the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with linen thread; and then treat those with what we have said about softening medicines and warm compresses until they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you need to incise across a crack or suture or cauterize, now it is necessary for you to make an incision in a straight line over the eyelash follicles as was described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the poultice between two layers as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the sermon on the treatment of incisions when they are above or below, let it run according to the operation, as it is prepared in the form of an incision, and that is in a variety of shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisans always prepare in every possible way that is feasible within him to restore the figure to its natural form or close to it, and that malady according to what is convenient for the operation and instruments in the major dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in certain individuals such that the eyelid is adhered above to the sclera, and it is prohibited from its ease of movement and natural functions, then you should introduce a probe below the eyelid, and lift it up with it, or extend it with forceps.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you should cut the adhesion with a thin blade, which is not sharp enough to cause pain from the cutting, holding it blunt so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and remove the tissue without scraping the wound with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your cutting be such that it gently removes that adhesion, allowing the eyelid to return to its natural form, and ensuring that all of the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you should put salt water on the wound with which you wash it; or distill in the juice of rosemary dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the wound with a cloth, and apply on the wound linen infused in egg white, and on the third day use healing substances until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On cutting of nails and of flesh growth near the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that a nail is of two kinds, either it is nervous, and resembles hard dry skin; or it is non-nervous, resembling frozen white moisture, which when touched by iron, can be forcibly removed without any residue being left behind.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both kinds do not begin except at the larger tear duct, gradually covering the eye and prohibiting light and the movement of the eyelid.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	But the method of working in cutting it is that the patient places their head in your lap, and then opens their eyes, and you lift the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the nail by slightly doubling it back and extend it to the parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Take a needle and attach to it a horsehair or ox hair or cowhair, or something similar, or strong thread. Gradually double the tip of the needle and place it in the center of the nail, then penetrate with the needle and bind the nail with thread; extend it to the sides above, and shave off the hair along the side of the nail where the pupil is.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And in this way you should follow the hair to the back of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then you should incise the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small forceps, and allow the tissue of the tear duct to heal naturally so that by doing this it does not cause continuous tearing.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail is placed in the sun once it has been extended or with thread, as we have said, and then shaved with a lion-shaped spatula of which this is the shape:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tissue so as not to cause a rupture and have the pupil perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	After the incision, place a small amount of powdered salt or clean linen made of sinew in it, and leave that for another day; then treat it with what is needed until it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not tender and you cannot place the needle in it, nor has it been placed there previously, then this kind of nail is treated with medications, and it heals as mentioned and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise it, then you open the wound of the malady and take a fine, sharp spatula in the shape described:
am subtilitat.	Of subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you take that and rarefy it and confound it and put it in the aforementioned receptacle, then distill from your hour in the morning until the heat is done making mischief or until it becomes clear or salted three times, and filter the liquid into another vessel on the following day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And thus iterate upon that operation until all of it is consumed, unless the opposite abscess appears in the liquid, for then you should leave that and begin to treat the abscess from its start until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And thus iterate your operation on that according to the reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The excision of the lacrimal flesh, if it causes great harm in the liquid, should be suspended for a month; and cut away part of that flesh, but do not complete the incision where it would cause a flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And thus distill in the lacrimal clear and pure until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of gangrenous tissue and what is born of tight flesh in the liquid.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	In some cases in the eyes, clear flesh is born and it spreads until it covers the pupil, or approaches or extends over the eyelids and draws them tightly together at the edges and is gathered like the edge of a balcony.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The procedure is that the patient places his head in your lap; then open the eyes of that person and collect all that flesh at convenient times with a forceps or tweezers; then incise the flesh at the beginning until it is completely finished with scissors, and be careful not to let any fall out during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be with the scalpel which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small scissors with which hair is collected according to how it will appear near this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	And when your incision is complete and all that flesh has been scraped away, then fill the wound with salt water, or sprinkle on red powder similar to corrosive medicines, and place over it a poultice of egg white until it is secure from abscesses.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any cause of inflammation remains and there is bleeding that needs to be controlled, and you fear an abscess, then leave the wound and treat that abscess with whatever cures that abscess, and afterward proceed with the operation when it has healed, and similarly do for the flesh that adheres in this kind of wound.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But you must be careful to keep all healing of the wound clean by natural or accidental means, use instruments, and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that the member can withstand the operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of hair in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Hair often comes from red veins that are hidden in the wound and prohibit its removal, and the wound should be left to heal over several days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	At the beginning, it is necessary for you to consider whether the wound in which there is hair is strong and if there is no other illness but hair, then you should remove that hair.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you instruct the patient to place his head in your lap, and then press those veins for one or two seconds according to your judgment; let that pressing be gentle and gradual according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	And thus one ounce is gradually applied to another in this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then gather those veins with subtle force, with subtlety, and cleanse the blood bit by bit until those veins appear empty and are reversed.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful that you do not lead the air to the extremities of the body; and if your operation is in the morning under the sun, and you are firm in your operation so as not to incise except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed it, then you will distill in the air pure green or red vapor so that with its sharpness it corrodes what is empty of blood.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible for you to gather all at that hour, then you bandage everything with what alleviates the pain, and leave him for several days until the pain subsides and he is assured of being free from abscess.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat on him according to the same method until he is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of nasal fractures.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat fractures with cauterization or with sharp medicinal burning as described and not healed, then do not let it generate in him but cut through the abscess after its maturity, and extract all the moisture that is within him until the bone is revealed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone and flesh are exposed and corruption or blackness is present, then you should apply a tool of this form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is called a rough head, and it is made of iron, and the head is round just like this one which is punctuated by small punctures with a nail or awl (as shown in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Place it on the corrupted part of the bone, and then rotate it between your fingers, and press gently with your hand until you know that the corruption is scraped away.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And do this several times, and then treat the area with astringent and drying agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	When the area is consolidated and good flesh has grown in its place, and the pus has stopped flowing and remains quiescent for forty days without being renewed or forming abscesses, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then what remains is to reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you expose the bone with a chisel or an acute instrument, and when the bone is exposed, then you apply three such instruments as follows:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The tip of the instrument should be triangular, and the shaft of the instrument should be gradually narrowed towards the tip as shown.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place it on the bone, and have it near the lacrimal bone; extend your hand slightly and then rotate your hand with the instrument until it penetrates all the bone, and you will feel the resistance as air escapes when you do this.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then at this time restore the place with astringent medicines that dry up as you have seen fit.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh and the place have become hardened, then the matter that was discharged to the surroundings returns to the source, hence this is quicker for the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the prominence of the belly.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the belly protrudes in its entirety and no harm or reduction occurs through vomiting, then it is necessary to purge the patient, and subsequently follow with fasting; and then apply windy poultices on the head without scarification and rub well; and then place a liniment on the belly made of colocynth, aloes, cyperus, and myrtle glue, and afterwards strengthen the plaster on the belly using dust.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method for the dust is that you take linen strips, and each strip should be folded into four parts; and make the powder from these strips.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then apply those plasters one on top of the other according to the quantity that the belly requires.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then strengthen them with a thick cloth tightly wrapped around them; and repeat the windy applications with rubbing without scarification; and then remove the wind poultices and bind the belly tight day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if in the meantime the binding becomes loose, then it must be made tight again.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then remove the binding during the day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the vein has already been reduced, that is good, and if not, then apply the plaster with the powder and the ligature and the cupping vessels until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the elevation of the uveal tunic.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When you find a disruption in the uveal tunic, and it protrudes like a raisin grain between the eyelids with a human face-like appearance, and you wish to incise this, then perform the operation as we have recommended: insert the needle at the base of the uvea from below upwards. Then place another needle where the double thread is located near the lacrimal part, and allow it to penetrate while keeping the first needle in its position; then cut the location of the double thread and lift that portion of the uveal tunic around the needle, and strengthen this motion.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then withdraw the needle and place over the wound lint infused in egg white, and leave it there until the thread falls off with the uvea.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then treat the wound with whatever will comfort it until the injury is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes it is advisable to apply a circular piece of cloth around the wound on all sides to cover a large elevation, and then pierce it with a fine needle so that the wound can reach the pus within, allowing the albuminous fluid to drain, and the wound will subside quickly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Then strengthen the treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of hernias.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness that is called hernia is not the one referred to as an inflammation that descends like water but is otherwise different.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treating it is to have the patient sit on a prepared and straight saddle, then take his head in your hands from both sides, and move that part where you see the swelling descend to below, so that it becomes dry and does not descend further, and keep the light, and the patient sees the causes as he did.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend below, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the descent of the swelling does not occur as we have said, then have the patient sit between your hands and take a thin spatula and place it over the pannicular area just below the continuation of the conjunctiva towards the cornea at the crown (into the visible area), so that the swelling is expelled.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once it is expelled, then you should apply water that has been boiled and in which you have mixed honey or water in which fenugreek and honey have already been boiled.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with the other methods until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water descending from the abdomen.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already discussed the types of water in the division and which should be punctured, as explained in the previous discourse, according to the patient's condition.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now you should have the patient lie down on a mattress and raise his arm, with the limb slightly bent.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And place your left hand near the eyelid of his eye if the affected eye is the left one; or your right hand, if it is the right eye.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And take hold of the probe with your right hand if the eye is the left one; or with your left hand, if it is the right eye.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And place the tip of the probe near the edge along the thickness of the white of the eye from the inner corner, and then gently push the probe in vertically and rotate your hand.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel when the probe has reached the curved part.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And ensure that the distance of the probe to the preon is equal to the space from the pupil to the edge of the black part, which is the edge of the eye; for you will see through it with the clarity of the corneal tissue.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the probe into the area where the fluid is, and then pull it out once again; thus if the fluid comes out immediately, you will see the patient's relief from the condition that had impaired their vision, and remove the probe from the eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then wait for a moment; if the fluid has come out, you should pull out the probe after waiting a little longer.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it has stopped and no more fluid comes out, you should then gently remove the probe, rotating your hand little by little. Dissolve a small amount of rock salt in water and use this solution to wash the inside of the eye. Then place a piece of cloth, or a stopper made of wool infused with warm oil and egg white over the eye.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	Let us and those of our time pause over that which is written in the thin white paper book.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if he does not obey the almond-shaped instrument because of its hardness — for it is one of those men whose urethra is hard — then you should take the spatula, which is called alberid, and this is its shape:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And thus perforate at that joint, and do not stop your hand in the movement, and it is nothing but making a subtle almond-shaped location.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then insert the almond-shaped instrument as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should prepare the patient for rest in a comfortable room where he can sleep on his back in a dark room, and all movements should be prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in the nature of water to smooth his nature, and do not turn his head right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And the bandaging should be according to his condition on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then undo that in the dark room and show him the clear sight, and let him see some causes, and then re-bandage on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And it is not necessary to do this at the hour of healing or soon after infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Handle this so that the water can flow easily and quickly due to great and strong attention.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess occurs, then you should undo the bandage before the seventh day and treat it with water to help the abscess drain.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	For four days you should cover the eye with a patch and place it over the mouth through which breath is drawn, so that it remains in the greatest darkness.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then gradually expose it to light and converse with him about its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in alchemy the disciple is not excused from certain visions, and now you should be bold about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has come to us from some of those who are knowledgeable about the art, and some have said that they make fire in the Ajrad, a madam perforated through which water is sucked.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But I have not seen anyone in our land who has accomplished this, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is something new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of madman for which one is considered such when ignorant of these:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of earth or iron properly, and their extremities are crafted with this subtlety, triangular in shape, the sharp end as such being the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of flesh wounds on the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When on the nose there arise various flesh growths that are attached, some of which have causes similar to a scorpion made of soft words, or to a sea polyp; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles such a sea creature.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And one is cancerous flesh, pale and dark in color; the other is fleshy growth, not dark in color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in the case of flesh that is not fraudulent or cancerous, make the patient sit between your thighs and expose it to the sun, and parch the surface of the wound with a heated iron.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract the parts from behind, and then incise what you have identified with a sharp, fine spatula in such a way that you know all the flesh has been separated; if it remains intact for any reason where the division is possible, at that moment you should cut it with one of the finer instruments with ease so that it does not remain attached for any reason.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if you are dealing with an abscess that is accompanied by bleeding or pus from a cautery, then you should pause what needs to be done; or if it is one of the malignant abscesses, then you should cut and cauterize that part where the blood has been divided and all the cavities have been separated.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then apply dressing near the nose close to the incision with water or vinegar.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is swollen and you notice moisture reaching the palate, then you will know that it has healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that inside there is flesh that has remained attached to the excessive pus-filled bones to which the separation has not reached.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, now you should insert some substance into the area that has swelling, and wrap it in cloth strips, placing a quantity equal to the width of your finger or less between each strip. Engage the patient and insert one end of the cloth with the substance into the nostril either directly or through another means as is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	Of pus that is made with air, let the odorament be thrown into it so that it reaches the channels of the nose, and let it be sprinkled over its surface, for troops accustomed to this action do so with the children at school, and it is a light cause for him who wishes to perform it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause the two extremities of the probe, one extending over the nose and the other remaining inside the nose, and then administer a flesh clamp to the nuts that are in the probe, and do this until you know that the flesh is already on the nuts of the probe.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the probe, and place in the nose near the bleeding a cautery, and do this for three days or more until it has corroded everything that remains of the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the treatment, place in the nose a lead tube for about ten days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you prefer a drying cure, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument for making enemas, with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make this of silver or ivory, which should resemble a small spoon covered, like a small cup, with the opening similarly shaped.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a tube with a joint like a cane, and the tube of the instrument for making enemas should be flat and open; to which attach a handle at the back, so that you can hold it when heating in oil or whatever you want from juices and suctionable causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	Here is the precious recipe for capipurgi: take of mustum of beaver, of white balsam, of ginger, and saffron, of long pepper, of scorzonera, of spica of fennel each ounce two; compound them with the juice of barley and hair, and make pills, and mix one pill with water of hyssopus, and give it to the sick person lying down.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	About thorns in the nostrils.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Often thorns become stuck in the extremities of the nose, and after being extracted, they are bandaged and ointment is applied for several days during which one must be careful about proper care.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason, you should incise it at the beginning of its appearance, and heal all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then pause on the place where you cauterized or applied burning medicine, which was there before it.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if the incision is delayed until it has been bandaged, now consider whether it is hardened, tough, dark in color, and with little sensation; then do not touch it with iron because it is a chronic abscess. For often, when you incise this abscess, great harm will come to the one who suffers from it.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is easily touched and not dark in color, and when incision is possible throughout it, then evacuate the patient's illness and incise it without fear, and treat the area with something that dries and constricts until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On to sew up the nose and lips and ear when the continuity has been dissolved by plague or similar.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when dissolution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, few will undertake such an operation except in some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when dealing with any cause of these conditions, you should consider whether it is a fresh wound or involves the loss of flesh and blood. Then sew together the two sides of the wound, and subsequently treat what lies within so that it may heal.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the edges of the continuity dissolution are already separated and each side is clean, then you should scrape each part of its apparent edge until blood comes out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then sew the two edges together with stitches and strengthen them. Over these, apply powder of dragon's blood and sprinkle it, and place over the powder a piece of mastic plaster or another consolidating plaster. Let this remain for two days or three, and then remove it and change the plaster until the pus has stopped, and subsequently treat internally so that it may heal.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the method of sewing is that you may join the continuity dissolution either with needles as we have recommended for sewing the abdomen, or you may join it with thread as you see fit.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the extraction of those causes that appear in the two edges in their internal parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	In many cases, men develop hard swellings in the partitions inside their lips, resembling horse fat, and some of them are smaller while others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Then cut the lips and divide each of those hardnesses from all sides, and after the incision, fill the place with finely chopped wool so that the blood is constricted, and then wash it with something sour and treat the area with water that has astringent properties until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	About incising the flesh attached to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Often there is flesh attached to the gum, which the ancients called "albulus." Then you should suspend that with a thread or whatever you have and incise it near its base, and allow the pus or blood to flow.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then apply finely chopped wool or other drying powders to the area.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, incise it again and cauterize it, for after the cauterization it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	About extracting teeth with iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth in the inner and outer parts, and between the gums to which they are attached, there are rough spots, tartar deposits, and sometimes darkened areas that turn yellow or green, causing corruption to the gum and making the teeth tartar-covered.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore, make the patient sit between your legs and place his head in your lap, and rasp the teeth in which appear such tartar deposits and causes similar to sand until there remains none of them, and do this for the blackness and yellowness and for the others until they are cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if it is still in that of the beginning of the treatment, it is good; and otherwise, then you repeat the treatment on those on another day and on the second and on the third until it reaches its final stage as you wish.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that the teeth require various tools of different forms and shapes according to how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And because the razors with which the tooth is cut from inside are different from those used to rasp between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare as you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the Extraction of Teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	When you treat the tooth of its pain with all diligence and delay in its entire extraction, for there is no reason that suffices to replace it when it is extracted, since it is a substance sublime wherein lies the necessity of its extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But when the patient is compelled to have that tooth extracted, you must firmly be certain which is the painful tooth, for sometimes the pain deceives the patient and he thinks it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one but shortly afterward the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is removed, as we have already seen through the experience of practitioners.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Thus when you are certain which is the painful tooth, and once you know well, then it is necessary that you incise around the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth and gums entirely, and then pull it out with your fingers or with fine forceps gradually little by little until you have extracted it.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then use strong pliers for good leverage or force, and place the head of the patient between your knees so that he does not move, and then extract the tooth straight in such a way that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And so if it is not loose, then take one of those instruments and place it around the tooth from all sides with ease and endeavor to remove it as was done initially.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is fractured or decayed, then you should wrap that fracture with cloth and secure it at the tip with a thin thread so that it does not break during your constriction on it with pliers.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you must operate extremely carefully when incising around the entire gum area and guard against using too much strength so that you do not break it or leave part of it behind, and return to the patient with care lest the subsequent pain be worse than the initial discomfort.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful that you do not act as some ignorant barbers do in their hastiness and audacity regarding the extraction of teeth; for they often fail to administer what we have recommended. Many times this leads to great harm to sick people, making it much more difficult to remove them later, or leaving the roots of the teeth exposed, or causing you to extract them along with some bones of the jaw, as many instances have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	Before the removal of the tooth, let the mouth be washed with hot water or vinegar diluted with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if blood flows because of this, just as you would do in similar cases, then now take some cerement and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that does not suffice, apply a cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and holding them delicately with which the tooth is grasped at the beginning should be long, short-handed, and thick, so that they do not bend when you are working with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should be like pieces of thick handle so that when you grasp them, they are not bent, their extremities should be short.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of Indian iron, with straight extremities, and at the ends of those there should be teeth, some of which enter into others and grasp by strong constriction, and sometimes the extremities of those should have the shape of a bird's beak called a ciconia, which is a kite, and they are of strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the removal of teeth and the extraction of the bones of the locked jaw.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to remove a tooth that is trapped due to some cause, then it is necessary for you to place a poultice on the area with boiled substances for one day or two until the site becomes softened; and afterwards use such tools or forceps with ends shaped like the beak of a bird called ciconia or guanta, the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	Their extremities should be treated inside just as the limb or the forehead.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if he does not obey you when using these forceps or tongs, then you should cut above this ridge and remove all the flesh, and insert the instrument called atali, which is a small lever whose form is as follows:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it should have a short thick part about an inch long, and it should not be hollow so that it does not rattle.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Then if by this the ridge is properly exposed, it is good; and if not, assist with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular end in which there should be some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it should have a triangular and finer end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now assist with this instrument which has two prongs, of which this is the form as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which will be described for tooth scraping; because this instrument is useful, and this is its form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	with a triangular end that is curved or short, which should have some thickness, and it should not be hollow so that it does not rattle.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And know that the instruments for tooth extraction are similar and likewise resemble other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the skilled and subtle artisan finds for himself according to what he understands from the operation and various diseases; for there are diseases about which the ancients did not say or leave a proper instrument, due to their varied forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the bone of the jaw or any other bones in the mouth is fractured, or if it hurts, then at that time place the dressing on it as appropriate for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of teeth, and assist with gestures of this form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And it should be removed little by little, and should be held in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all of the bone is evacuated; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small ulcer in the bone, then remove that of that ulcer and its blackness, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of teeth that protrude beyond the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth that protrude do not follow their natural course and particularly when they affect women, especially those of venerable age; therefore, it is necessary for you to consider: if a tooth is close to another tooth and there is no possibility of filing or covering it, then extract it; but if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument whose form is as follows; it resembles the tusk of a boar, and is made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp point.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your incision should be such that when you cut it, it does not take more than a few days due to the hardness of the tooth, and it should not become inflamed among the other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is a protruding tooth that can be filed down, then file it with an Indian steel file whose form is as follows:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it be of Indian iron and the edge perfectly; and let it be of small points as with a file, with which needles are made, with which the tooth is filed little by little over several days with ease, so that it may not become another tooth or gum.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And apply strips to it at the end, and cut that with razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth of which part is broken and you use the tongue to shape it, now you must file that inside until the roughness of that fracture is smoothed and filled so that the tongue does not wear it down nor the word be corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of broken teeth with gold or silver filling.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When it happens that the front teeth are knocked out or loosened by impact or fall, and the patient cannot chew on them properly, even after you have treated them with astringent medicines and your treatment has not been effective, now in order to prevent them from falling out, fix those that need it with gold filling and not silver, because silver changes color and quickly becomes noticeable, whereas gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the filling be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the shape of the filling is that you take the filling and place twice as much between two healthy teeth, and then extend the filling between one or more broken ones, until it reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then continue the treatment at the part where you began, and strengthen your work with ease and skill so that it is not damaged.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And so let your thread be such that you can pull out the filings of the teeth without evasion.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut off the excess part of the thread using forceps or scissors, and attach it in each place with skill, and convert and hide them between the healthy tooth and the affected tooth, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then make that as narrow as a Roman coin.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is loosened or broken, pull that or those out during the entire time and replace them with another thread.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and of two affected teeth, as you see them tied:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it happens that you return one tooth or two near their proper places, and they grow back as we have recommended, and they remain healthy.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And only a skilled artisan and wise person can do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes a piece of cattle bone is used for some reason, and it is shaped like a tooth, and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is attached as we have said, and remains and serves there for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the cutting of the bandage that goes around the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament that goes under the tongue sometimes is present from birth, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation is that of opening the mouth of the patient, and placing his head in such a way; and raise his tongue, and then incise that band of nerves according to its breadth as far as it is loosened from its attachment.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	And if there is any hardness or swelling in that area, and this has occurred due to the consolidation of an illness, then you should cut through it lengthwise until you have severed the band so that the swelling may be dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful that you do not make a cut in the surface of the flesh and thereby sever an artery, causing a flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the remnants of the incision with salt water or vinegar water or plain water; and afterwards leave the tongue hanging loose; this is done so that the patient will hang their tongue out each night to prevent it from healing in an improper manner.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if bleeding occurs, apply over the area powdered vitriol; but if the blood flows continuously, then cauterize the area with a hot iron, which is appropriate for this situation.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then proceed with the treatment using other methods until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of a cyst beneath the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	At times, a cyst appears beneath the tongue, resembling a small swelling that prevents the tongue from its natural movement and can grow large enough to fill the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation is that you open the mouth of the patient facing towards the light and examine the cyst.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of dark brown or black color and hard, in which the patient feels no sensation, then do not touch that which is gangrenous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it inclines towards a whiteness, in which there is humidity, then you place the incision in that area, and dissect it with a fine scalpel, and cut it from all parts; and if blood flows during the hour of your operation, then pause for three breaths, which is vitriol, until the blood congeals.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work once you have properly treated it, after washing it with vinegar and salt; and treat the area with other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from both ears and those that are in the throat and other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When I refer to the area in the throat that is glandular and assembled somewhat together, which appears outside and are called ears, when you treat them with what we have said in the division and they do not heal, then consider whether the abscess is hard, dark brown in color, with little sensation; then do not touch that part with an instrument.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that part with an instrument due to the flow of blood; instead, let that remain until it has ripened, and then either you will extract it or it will burst on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, soft, and the root of it is delicate, then that should be dissected.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	In the operation that you consider, before your operation, see if the abscess from the cautery has healed completely or if it has diminished in any way; and then have the patient lie facing the sun, with their head turned to the side, and open the mouth of the patient, and the servant takes between his hands the tongue of the patient down with an instrument of noble form, which is this shape:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or iron, and it should be fine like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	When you press with that the tongue and the abscess is shown to you, then take some (material) and place it under the affected area, then pull it outwards as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Take another piece of cloth for some reason and then cut it with the instrument whose shape is as follows:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it resembles a pair of forceps, but the ends are curved, so that the opening of each is aligned with the other, sharp, made of iron.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not available to you, then cut it with a scalpel whose shape is as follows: It is sharp on one side and not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have made one incision, make the other in the same manner of cutting, and then cleanse the patient's wound with fresh water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is bleeding, cleanse the wound with water infused with lemon peels or myrtle leaves and similar astringent substances until the flow of blood is stopped, and then treat it until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And in some cases we incise in the neck other abscesses or those two ears, and we incise those as is said in the incision of two melons equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I had already treated a woman with an abscess which was born in her throat, the color of which tended to be dark, and it had little sensation, and it had closed her throat, and the woman breathed very narrowly, and she had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and she would have reached death if it had not been for a day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had spread so much that it reached two sides and emerged through two places.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I decided to operate and inserted a probe into one of the openings, and pulled it out, and much matter came out from there, and then I incised that which included the other opening, and then I closed its mouth, and compressed its tongue, and then I placed the probe in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I excised a large part of it, and only a little blood flowed from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then her throat was completely clear, and she began to drink water immediately, and soon after she ate food. Therefore, I did not need to incise that abscess for a long time, and an abscess formed in the place of that one, which I incised before it could spread further.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I had some vinegar and cauterized her throat with it; this was for the addition of treatment. And then I wandered around and did not know what God would do next regarding that situation.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter xxxvii.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On incising an abscessed armpit.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When there is a discharge from the armpit, and it is abscessed and long, it is then called perpendicular; and if it is below thick and round, it is then called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	However, when it is cured by what we have mentioned in the division and does not conform to your treatment, and also sometimes an abscess remains inside but is subtle, then you should incise the one that is aggregated and round; and if it reaches a certain length and is bloody, of dark color or black, and does not respond at the center, then you should attempt the incision cautiously, for there is fear of malignancy in such cases.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it according to the method I have described regarding its whiteness and length, make the patient lie down with their arm raised using an instrument that fits the shape of the area, and then press it firmly. Then pull it downwards and incise it with one of two instruments mentioned in the double incision procedure.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And you should not incise it beyond what is appropriate within the natural limits without excess, for if you incise too much, you will harm the patient.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And after the incision, use what we have recommended in the double incision procedure, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, if the patient is distressed by the incision, you should use cautery without fear, and the method of cauterization involves only sharp water. Place the head of the patient on your lap, then press it firmly with the instrument we have mentioned. Then take the sharp water that we described in the chapter on cauterization and apply it to the area, making sure not to make it too thick or thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument which has this shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Here is the extract of the cautery in which the medicine is placed as with the cautery of copper alloy, and place the instrument with the medicine on the wound, and the patient lies on his back so that saliva or mucus from the mouth does not fall onto it due to its proximity, lest it should cause harm to that part.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then take the medicine and apply it to the uvula for a short period until you see it become blackened and numb from the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a cork and wrap it around the end of the cautery, and dip the cork into the medicine, and insert the cautery with the cork into a tube so that the cork adheres to that tube, and do this as many times until you achieve what you desire from the cauterization of the wound, and then leave it until it dries and falls off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and then after the cauterization clean around the wound with a cork dipped in syrup, and modify it with what is around the wound from the medicine, and wash it with fresh water, and treat it externally with an embrocation, and care for it with remedies until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of treatment is safer than incision and longer in duration out of caution.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	In some cases, the uvula is cured with something that is less harsh than cauterization and incision, as it is treated with sublimation in this manner: take camphor, hyssop, oregano, rue, Arabian saffron, chamomile, and similar herbs, and mix all these ingredients or some of them in a pot, and immerse them in sour wine, and boil; the pot should be heated moderately, and in the middle of the pot place a tray upon which is placed an instrument made of wire like this: it should be made of silver or wire.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And let the extremity be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the vapor reaches the uvula above which the uvula is obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then proceed with it on those moist areas until they are dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the occurrence of abscesses, for it would be too harsh on the abscess, and you should not do this, but rather wait for the maturation of the abscess.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument at hand, now take a cane and attach to the end of it a piece of cloth dipped in vinegar, so that the mouth of the patient is protected, for the cloth dipped in vinegar prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of spines and of what adheres in the wound and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Moist substances adhering to the wound or thorn or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you should remove what is apparent from those substances, on which your eye rests, and then press the tongue with an instrument in front of sunlight, so that it becomes clear to you what is in the wound.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what does not appear and is hidden in the wound, you should make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, for the cause attached to the wound will be easily expelled by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of bread or lettuce seed or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge and soak it well in vinegar, then let the patient swallow that, as when it reaches the place where spines are lodged, they will be easily expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Take one eel and boil it in vinegar, then remove its intestines and extract the contents; or take a poultice and apply the contents to it and spread it on.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If you do not forget the causes which we have mentioned, now use an instrument of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be as thick as a small finger, and at its end let there be a curve which you insert into its throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And when you act, keep his head raised up, and be careful not to touch the bone of his throat, so that it does not injure him or the person who is holding him, or cause harm to the surgeon’s hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, let the patient be well prepared, because of his knowledge of the location of the cause attached and held down, and pull his hand with the instrument up, all this according to the amount that is prepared within him so that it is not forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of a bloodsucker attached to the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When treating a bloodsucker with what we have said in the division of treatment with medicines and not compresses, now consider the patient's throat in the sunlight, since you have already drawn his tongue forward with the instrument that we recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you see the bloodsucker, extract it gently with a small incision or with fine tweezers.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to remove it then, now take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's throat, and immediately place a heated iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times (until the bloodsucker is dead and falls off the throat) and keep the patient from water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Take a sponge full of clean water and wipe the mouth with it, then rinse the mouth with that water; and do not let any impurity enter from there, and pour out the water after an hour or so when the blood has settled.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not possible to do as we have recommended with this, then fumigate the malodor with cypress or with sweet basil using the instrument which we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, and he will be cured.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another method of operation in fumigation for this, which is that you take an olive in which are burning coals and the olive is covered with a cover in the middle of which is a hole, and attach the end of the instrument to that hole; then proceed with the fumigation from above; and place the patient's mouth on the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the fumigation does not escape until you know that the fumigation has reached the blood, for the blood will fall immediately.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not work, then repeat the fumigation as many times as necessary, and abstain the patient from drinking water, and give salty and dry foods, and let them not drink water; and it is also necessary that they follow this regimen strictly.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which blood is drawn from the gum when it is seen; and it resembles forceps as you might see them, but with some curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed in the gum, and the end of it resembles the beak of a heron, which is sharpened with a file, so that when it grasps something, it does not let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the speech on the preparation for abscesses and their incision.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are various types, of many ways, as will be recalled, each in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they differ in their puncture and incision by two methods, of which one is according to the nature of the abscess itself; and by what they derive from the humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is according to the locations where they occur in the body, for an abscess occurring in the head is different from one occurring in the buttocks; and an abscess occurring in fleshy parts is different from one occurring at a joint; and each has its treatment by surgical operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And there are some abscesses that should not be punctured but only at the proper time of maturation of the pus or when they are fully developed.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	There are other abscesses that should be evacuated when they are crosswise and not mature according to their development, such as abscesses near joints, because when an abscess is close to a joint, its nature extends until you can puncture what is around it, and lightly the ligaments or nerves of that joint may be corrupted, causing contraction of that limb; or if it is next to a principal member, delaying its puncture could lead to damage to the main member; or if it is near the buttocks, then puncture it before it becomes mature; but do not puncture it raw and without proper digestion, except for those close to the buttocks, so that you do not cause premature discharge of pus inside the buttocks, leading to an elongation and forming a fistula, or causing damage before it can heal.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	You know that you should pierce the abscess when it is ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know that it is ripe when there is a reduction in pain and the cessation of fever, and shortly after, a decrease in swelling and pulse, and the sharpness at the head of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you should know that the puncture should be made at a place where the pus is closest to the surface of the abscess and from where it will come out easily during healing.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the puncture should always be made along the length of the skin or body if the abscesses are in parts such as the chest, elbows, tendons, cords of nerves, arteries; and finally, in all places equally where there is no reflection; for in those that do reflect, use a puncture according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy area, the best time to make the puncture is after the digestion of the second stage has been confirmed, as we have said; for if you pierce it before that, it will prolong the illness of the patient and cause much harm, and greatly harden the lips of the abscess and its depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some abscesses should be punctured across the grain of the skin or body due to necessity, or according to what is required by the member.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you should administer a small puncture, and in large abscesses, a larger puncture or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other abscesses in which the incision should be hollowed and made when it is to be done as with bread, and it is done at a time when it can already stand, just like those that occur with excessive boils and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are cut open having three angles; and of those in which it is cut open as the figure of a myrtle leaf, just like the abscesses of the armpits.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those in which round incision and lunar incision are administered, and similar to these.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But in the one that does not have any such as its superficial lion abscesses, you should pierce it with a superficial puncture, or just plane it.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has already collected pus, you should pierce it but do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that moment; having extracted one part from it, then scrape the abscess internally on another day, and then extract a larger portion, and continue doing this several times according to its progression until it heals.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is a robust man, or a pregnant woman, or an infant, or an elderly person in frailty, for in such cases the vital spirit is quickly resolved through the evacuation of the pus, and the patient easily recovers, and you will have operated successfully.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Therefore, guard this chapter with great caution, and when you perform the incision in which you pierce these abscesses, make sure to clean the wounds and then consider whether the wound of the abscess is small or requires a flat incision; if it is small, administer some lint or antiseptic cotton. If the abscess is large and the incisions are many, then you should place dry lint in each tract until they heal.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the cord is cut or has been hollowed out along its circumference, then you should fill it with old cloth or thread made from linen, as when you have treated ulcers or swellings without moisture; and strengthen it on the third day; and subsequently proceed to treat it according to what is needed from ointments until it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If blood flows during the time of your operation, then prepare water and vinegar in which you dip a cloth, and place that over the area where the blood is flowing for several times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the bleeding continues, then you should administer treatment and care, using powders which I have recommended in various places of this our book and in division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is in the time of winter, and the site of the abscess is on many nerves, then you should apply powders mixed with vinegar and heated oil, and place those on the sites.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the sites are fleshy, then you should apply powders soaked in water and oil or in vinegar and oil, and this should be wiped on for three days as we have said, and then you should open the abscess, cleanse it, and administer to its cure what it needs until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses generally, but according to the method of distinction I have already said about every abscess in what manner is the way of its cure separately by chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On the section of abscesses that appear on the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	On the neck of the head, small abscesses appear, and they are of various types of nodes that contain membranes; and their types vary.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they are soft, and the contents of these are moist, similar to jelly.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	Of those things which contain humidity like dust, and similar to them; and of those things which are lithic, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as you should know that the extraction of those does not oppose the curvature.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you should press them with an instrument whose form approaches this, which is called an entrodes, so that you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what it contains is humidity, then you should divide that with a section along its length by a superficial section according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin in the section from line .B. to line .G. Therefore, when the humidity is evacuated, you should then excise that skin which contains the humidity, and do not leave any cause for recurrence, as closely observed tumors return if any cause remains.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse a piece of cloth in Egyptian ointment if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and apply it to the wound and leave it there for another day, as this will corrode everything that remains of that membrane.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply the cloth to the ointment again, a second and third time if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that membrane; now treat the wound with an ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if an abscess contains hard nodes, then you should incise that according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a section having the shape of a cross, and insert once between the two lips of the incision and scrape it thoroughly from all sides, and exert your skill in extracting the membrane that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If there is opposition from your surgeon, now do what I have recounted first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly treat the mature abscess by incision and cure as we have told you; and the incision of a mature abscess is easier, since it contains little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes there are cases of abscesses in the head in certain people who are not very moist; the cause is that I once incised an abscess on the head of an old woman and found it as hard as a stone, rough, white, which could not be penetrated, and if anyone were to attempt to treat it that way, they would suffer harm.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	However, in other abscesses that occur in the head, this is not the case of this chapter; also, the abscesses that appear on the heads of children and behind the ears should be treated with superficial incisions.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the incision of those in the lower part so that the contents of the abscess can drain into the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then treat those as is appropriate for that type of cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the incision of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Often these abscesses occur in the neck and armpits; and sometimes they appear in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck often develop between the muscles, and every scrofula of these is within its own proper layer, just as with knots and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	There are various types of these scrofulas, and they are spots. Of those, only some are lithic, and of those, only the ones containing moisture are subject to treatment, and among them are malignant ones which do not respond to cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, when you encounter one that is in good condition during the examination, whose color matches that of the gland and which is not adhered to any part, nor attached to the neck nerves or veins, and is not swollen, cut it with dry scissors superficially above the upper line of .G. between the line of .B., and scrape it completely from both sides of the gland as we have said about abscesses of the head, and remove it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more careful that the vein or nerve not be cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the scraping not be sharp, so as not to harm you during cutting or disturb the patient, and do not cut what is not necessary; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and stop your operation, then apply green vitriol powder or other powders that promote blood flow and staunch the wound. Let it rest inside where the abscess subsides, and when the inflammation is mollified and begins to become purulent, proceed accordingly.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood has been constricted.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation once you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire at the time of the operation if there is any cause for other small scrofulas, so cut those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the scrofula a large vein, cut at the hour when you do not injure that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	And cut so that the seam is very strong and let it be such that it falls by itself without harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already soaked in Egyptian oil, and then treat that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut out that scrofula entirely, then sew together the two lips of the wound and close it up so quickly that there is no time for any superfluity.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is excessive superfluity due to the size of the scrofula, then cut into its root and extract it, apply sutures, and do as has been said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for the scrofulas that contain humidity, pierce it with a superficial incision where the place of maturation appears to you, and proceed with an incision that reaches the deepest part of the mass, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then proceed with the incision, apply ointment and treatments suitable for those cases, so that it accelerates what remains of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see the wound already cleaned, then treat it with ointment of flesh-generating properties until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the incision of the pustule of an accidental abscess in the groin.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients called this section in the epitome, and no one in our land has seen that operation performed.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those people.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In men who have a squint, it is advisable to avoid the extraction of the epilhot, as by doing this no benefit will be gained since all the veins and the major ones in the affected area are not reached.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have boils in the mouth or throat or near the ears, when the illness is not in the bone, it is better to use the section of epilhot to avoid the loss which is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do this, we should incise the epilhot below three circles of its circles, or four if it is a small section across two circles in quantity. The section should be made in soft tissue, not in cartilage, and this place is suitable for cutting because it is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels there are few.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the surgeon is cautious, it is better to first extend the throat skin by one inch and then cut into the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any reason to do so.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then incise the soft tissue as we have recommended; and it is significant for the section of the canal by the membrane which is attached to that part and by the absence of voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And let the wound be left open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the time is feared for perforation, bring together two edges of the wound's skin, and close it up except where it is near the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation:
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Al-bucasis says that the summary of the speech which we have recounted is an exposition, namely that one sees that some of these abscesses have obstructed the throat of the patient, and the patient has come within reach of death, and the airway is cut off, and some go to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the site of the wound by some respiration, and he may be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this commander allows the incision to remain open so that the poison inside may be consumed by the disease; and it is the poison of him for three days; and therefore at that time commands such an incision, and treats it internally until he is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and inserted it into her throat and cut out part of the windpipe, and I was called to treat her, and I heard the moaning as if it were the groan of one near death, and uncovered the wound and saw the blood which had come from the wound in small amounts.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, I confessed that she had not cut any vein or artery, and air was coming out of the wound, and I treated her internally until she was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And the servant did not suffer any harm except for hoarseness in her voice, and after some days she returned to improvement in her condition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section on the epiglottis there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the section on abscesses that occur in the throat externally, and it is called a throat hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This swelling called groin hernia is a large swelling according to the color of the body, and it occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it happens in two ways, either naturally or accidentally.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, there is no need for treatment.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one happens in two ways; one of which is similar to fatty knots, and the other way is like a swelling caused by an arterial clot, and in that case there is cause for concern.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is not appropriate to treat it with iron unless it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should proceed with caution and investigate it as mentioned. If you find it similar to fatty knots and not attached to any veins, then you incise it like you would knots and extract it with water containing soap and bursericlam; otherwise, thoroughly examine its nature, and subsequently treat the area with what is appropriate for treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the Section of Kinds of Knots.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	There are various kinds of knots, and I have already mentioned all their kinds in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary for me to describe the difference between a knot and an exitus as would cause doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, I say that in an exitus there is heat and fever and intense pain until the boiling of the superfluity subsides; and it completes putrefaction at which point the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	This may not be a heat nor fever nor pain, and it continues like a lion's leap which is to its prey.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a pustule and it is made thus as it vacates, whether larger or smaller, and its kinds are two, either dry or greasy and containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are motley, as I say in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of this condition, express it and inquire about it at the beginning concerning the disturbance which is called an intermisson, as its form will come in the chapter which is near to this one.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the method of inquiry into abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this disturbance and insert it in the place most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will revolve it there little by little until you know that the disturbance has already penetrated the tissue.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And finally withdraw it according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and then extract the disturbance and consider what has come out in its wake.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the flowing moisture, of whatever color it may be, is found, then you shall incise it with a superficial section as I have said regarding other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if from the wake of the disturbance you do not find moisture, then you shall know that it is dry.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And if it is dry, make an incision in the form of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	as I have taught you, and suspend it with threads, and incise the tissue from all sides easily, and preserve the skin or sac, if possible, over that and extract the pus from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If the vein is cut during the operation, it is not possible to extract that one, and you must seal it with stitches so that nothing may remain inside from which infection might arise.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If anything remains inside for any reason, whether little or much, the wound will return according to the vein.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that something small remains inside, then apply the wound with some corrosive sharp powders and treat the wound, and place on it what will form an abscess cauterized, and cure it by another method until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the wound is large, then you should stitch both sides of it and treat it with what promotes healing.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If the vein is either pulsating or non-pulsating and in opposition, then you should cauterize it and fill the site with three applications of vitriol, letting that rest for two days or three until the wound subsides and the bleeding ceases; and afterward return to separate what was cut from the wound.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those, there are instruments of three types, some being large, some medium, and some small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium instrument is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small instrument is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Here is the translation:
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of the experts, and they are called albered, and one of them is called berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	It consists of three types, for among them is one great, middle, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the great expert is as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the middle expert is as follows:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small expert is as follows:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is suitable for them to treat abscesses, excrescences, fistulas, and buboes, as well as other conditions related to the bones and various causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	They make needles, large and thick, as well as large needles used to sew leather, which are made of citrus thorns, or of wood, or of iron, or of silver. And the best ones are those made of citrus thorns.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	The experts make black feather probes, which they use to probe fistulas in the concavities of which there are reflections, so that they can be reflected by their lightness on those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	They are of three types, for some of them are long, and others are middle-sized, and the others are short, depending on the quantity of the width of the fistula and the narrowness of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The form of the large expert (lead probe) is as follows:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The form of the middle-sized expert (lead probe) is as follows:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The form of the small expert (lead probe) is as follows:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the lancets are of many species, for among them are some simple ones, which have only one curvature, and there are three kinds: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of their curved ones there are hooks, and they are of three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among those with curves there are ones having two curvatures, and they are of three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those that have three curvatures, there are three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The form of a large simple lancet is as follows:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of a medium simple lancet is as follows:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small simple lancet is as follows:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The form of a large curved hook is as follows:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The form of a medium curved hook is as follows:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small curved hook is as follows:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a large lancet having two curvatures is as follows:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The form of a medium lancet having two curvatures is as follows:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a small lancet having two curvatures is as follows:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a large lancet having three curvatures is as follows:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a medium lancet having three curvatures is as follows:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a ligature having three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the knives with which nodes and abscesses are incised and scraped; they are of three kinds: one is large, another medium, and a few others.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a large knife:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of the medium-sized knife:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of a small knife:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those with which incision is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not sharp; they are not designed in such a way to pause, but rather so that during the scraping of nodes there is no fear of cutting a vein or nerve. And by this means, the patient may be healed quickly after the abscess has been scraped, finding some relief due to the adjustment following the incision of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of forceps, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the large forceps:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of medium-sized forceps:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of small forceps:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of iron and resemble a reed from which alcohol is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And there is a punctured extremity on the side where the spatula is hidden, and along that edge are the parts inside and outside, as you can see when you want to.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers during the puncture of abscesses so that the patient does not perceive them; they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of flaps from which the blood flow is ligated are of three types: large, medium, and small; the forms of these:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made from citrus peel, round with some length, and they are delicate.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And you should have these types of flaps, large, medium, and small, because with them you can ligate blood flow quickly when necessary, and also at other times when there is no immediate need for medication.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to ligate blood in all parts of the body, but only in fleshy areas such as the thighs and sides of the body, and on the muscles of the arms, and on the breasts and abdomen and similar fleshy parts.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And at times, some are made of other small instruments resembling the shape of fish scales; with which blood is ligated when performed for phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And at times, some are made round in this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of men's breasts that are similar to women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	In some cases, men's breasts become enlarged when they begin to sweat during sleep, and then the breasts resemble those of women, and we call this condition Roman apostemata, which is rare.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for that which you are to treat in this manner, cut it into a crescent-shaped section according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, and then shave off all the roughness, and then fill the wound with flesh-growing medicine, and then sew together the two edges of the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the breast inclines to the sides and is softened because of its size as it often does in women, then cut it into two parts with its excess pus, each part resembling a crescent-shaped section, each contained within the other except for their ends, such that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from the line B to the line G. Then shave off the edge between the two lips of the wound, remove the fatness, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders necessary for healing until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the patient's discomfort and blood flow, then fill the wound with cloth submerged in a corrosive liquid and leave it until that corrodes what remains of the fat, and then care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the Incision of Abscesses That Occur Near the Armpit.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that occur near the armpit are often of the type of scrofula, hard, and they contain a hair-like substance.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And only some of these contain moisture; those that contain moisture should be cut in a crescent shape according to this figure: from the line G to the line B. And when everything has been evacuated from the abscess, you then fill it with thick cloth and leave it until the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	Let the cut be treated and cared for with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the type of the glands or scrofula, then you should incise it in the manner described in the section on scrofula as well.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the plague has spread to the point of gangrene, then administer cauterization as we have previously described.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the incision of abscesses that occur due to arteries or veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured and the part above it becomes inflamed, an abscess may occur. The signs by which one can determine whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: for when the abscess is due to an artery, it tends to aggregate in the upper part of the body; and if you press on the abscess with your fingers, you will hear a hissing sound in it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And when it is due to a vein, it appears near the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	The incision of this abscess is risky, especially in areas such as the armpits, angles, neck, and other parts of the body; it is dangerous, so its treatment should be avoided, and particularly so if it occurs in the extremities or on the head.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But for an abscess caused by inflammation of the artery opening, incise it in its proper section lengthwise; then carefully open the section with hooks near the artery, and separate the tunics until it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Upon that needle I place something and make it penetrate into the other side, and tie the artery with double thread in two places, which cause I explain in the extraction of two arteries, which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then place the location between two ligatures with a spatum inside so that the blood stops there until it is all dissolved and the abscess is resolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer treatment in which pus is generated so that the ligatures fall off; and afterward, treat it with appropriate remedies so that it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess due to the section of a vein, then you should hold with your hand what is within reach concerning the abscess and its condition, and then insert the needle below the place where you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and tie a double thread in such a way that you extract it from the other side, and afterward ligate the abscess with a good ligature as I have told you regarding the grapevine ligature on both sides of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then insert the thread with the needle below all of the abscess beyond the insertion of the first needle, and tie the threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess in its proper place so that when what is inside it comes out, you then incise the excess of the vessel, and leave what is connected to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply powder on which you have soaked in vinegar and oil, and afterward administer the treatment with bandages and remedies so that it heals.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter on abscesses which occur due to nerve strain.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Just as abscesses occur in arteries and veins, so too do abscesses occur in nerves when they are struck or due to excessive labor, and similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it happens that this occurs in the areas of the joints or the heel, or in any place where the joints are frequently troubled.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	It is a severe abscess and resembles the color of the surrounding tissue. It is one of its worst conditions when it is hard and accompanied by vehemence, and at that time the patient appears in a state similar to stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess that aggregates at the front of the body, and because of this it is less severe, and it affects all parts equally without going to the parts in front or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, when it is in the joints, it should not be treated with iron, for it would easily lead to contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But when it is in the head or on the forehead, treatment should be done with spatum.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if the abscess is small, then at this time treat it with forceps and incise it carefully.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if it is large, then suspend it with ligatures, and excise it, and afterward close the wound; and adjust the wound with stitches, and care for it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter II.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the section of abscesses which occur due to pain in the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Thus, for some persons, swellings occur in their bellies and in other parts of their bodies which are called fungi because they resemble mushrooms; the root of these is delicate and their head is thick. And often the lips of these are smooth, and it is of those that are small, and it is of those whose magnificence is great.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I myself have seen one, and in his belly there were two parts which resembled mushrooms more closely, and there was no difference between those white ones with their delicate roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those were turned outward and split open, and moisture flowed from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, I incised them and found within one weighing about eighteen uncias and the other weighing about six uncias.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the procedure in incising them is that you consider whether the malady is humid, and if the color of the tumor is white, humid, with delicate roots; then you incise it with a broad scalpel, and immediately in your presence cauterize it over fire, for the moisture and swelling must be expelled by drying up the blood; and if there is much bleeding, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you find the malady rare and fearful, guard against incising with an iron instrument; rather, take fresh lead, apply it to that tumor in the manner we have described; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And immediately adjust the tightness of the lead band; therefore, do not stop applying the lead continuously until it is detached and falls off by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If there is a thick pus in the wound, at that moment when making the incision into it there is some cause for fear and dread, especially if it is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you may incise half of it, and then cauterize that so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then treat it internally until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to presume to incise pus that is of a dark color, with little sensation, and hard in consistency, for that is usually cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And this will come as a reminder regarding these matters.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of an umbilical hernia.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	An umbilical hernia is caused by various reasons; it may be due to fissures in the abdominal wall above the belly, and through these openings, either tissue or intestines protrude as in other ruptures; or it can be caused by blood that flows from a vein or artery depending on what is present there; or by trapped air.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	However, if it is due to a fissure in the abdominal wall and the protrusion of tissue, then the color of the swelling is similar to the color of the skin; it is soft without pain, and may appear in various positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its appearance differs greatly from what we have described, and when you press on it with your fingers, it retreats and then returns; it is soft to the touch, and becomes more prominent after bathing and vigorous work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	Meats that are moist, when pressed with your hand, do not remain hidden, nor are they constricted, nor are they hard.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to inflammation, then these signs appear: the abscess turns to a declining blackness.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	Meat that is badly grown results in a severe, large, and hard abscess, which penetrates according to the amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to gas, then the touch of it is light.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in this case is that you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to inflammation of an artery, or a vein, or gas; then it is advisable for you to be cautious about treating it, since there is fear and dread as I have taught you in the chapter where I mentioned abscesses from arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the bowel or membrane, then it is advisable for you to command the patient to lie on their back and extend themselves; then examine around the entire navel with your hand, and then instruct them to stand between your hands on their back; then encircle the area with a piece of linen in the circumference of the navel where you have felt with your hand; and then extend half of the abscess above about an inch; and then tie it in the circumference tightly with strong thread or string according to the proper method.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Then pierce the center of the abscess extended over the bandage and insert your finger into that area to feel for the bowel; and if you find it caught or held by the bandage, then carefully extract it and move the bowel away from inside the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the cloth, now take one ounce of it; and incise the superfluities from it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	And if it is contrary to your art or vein, now surround that spot, and return to your operation; and take two needles and place in those two strong points and interpose two needles in the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a crisscross manner, which you should make penetrate; and then press the abscess into four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area so that the extended flesh can drain and fall off on its own; or incise it when it is softened and can be drained, and then treat it with whatever medicine is needed until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the eminence of the navel is of flesh or due to moisture, now it is necessary that you conquer the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or moisture which you find there, and then treat it with what is needed to heal and consolidate the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De curacio de cranc.	On the Treatment of Wounds.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already discussed in the division, the types of wounds and how to treat them with medicines, and that it is important for the treatment to avoid infection so that the wound does not become ulcerated; and we have also explained the causes and precautions in the treatment of wounds.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that in some cases wounds can be treated in places where it is possible to remove them completely, just as with wounds in the breasts or armpits and similar parts of the body assigned to extract everything, especially when they are starting small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When you are old and gray, do not seek to undertake it, for I cannot heal from that illness nor have I seen another, nor has anyone else reached that.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation is performed as we have said, when you proceed and leave the patient to purge from black bile several times, and then bleed him if retention is found to be evident.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with the preparation in which the operation will take place, and then hold up hooks that are needed for it; and then wrap all around with a good cloth to prevent any cause of infection inside so that no reason for it remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow freely, and do not cut it hastily, and press the areas, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is suitable among the available tools.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if it is contrary for thick blood to coagulate in a vein or artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood stops, and afterward treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 46.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of hydrops (edema or dropsy).
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, the types of hydrops related to water, and the signs of each type, as well as the treatment of it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And the one that is treated with iron is only the type of ascites alone, and it should not be approached with iron for the types of tympany or hydropsycha, for this is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this kind of tympanitic hydrops with medicines and do not confine your treatment, now consider whether the patient has reached debility, or if it is another illness accompanied by hydrops, just as if it were in the chest or abdomen similar to those cases. Then guard yourself that you do not treat them with iron, for there is fear concerning this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you see the patient with abundant vigor, and in them there is no other illness but hydrops alone, and they are neither a child nor elderly, then the method of the operation on them is that you lift the patient between your arms, and the assistant presses the abdomen of the patient with their hand, expelling the water from below the navel, and then take a spatum spinos (a sharp instrument) in this manner:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be of two sharp parts long, with a sharp tip like a spatum; however, it should have some slight tapering little by little, so that in the operation you do not pass into the bowel, and thus injure it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider whether the origin of the hydrops is from the bowels, for then it is necessary that in your section you keep away from the navel by a distance of three fingers below, on the right side over the navel.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the origin of the hydrops is from disease of the kidney, then your section should be to the left of the navel by three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the origin of it is from the spleen, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not necessary that your section be on the side on which the patient lies, so that the fluids do not rush to that place and cause harm.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Here is the translation:
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	I then pierce the cyst so that it reaches the space where the fluid is.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	I then extract that and insert an instrument which has this form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or ivory or lion's hide, at the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end of it is cut like the shape of a pen, as you can see.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the upper end of it is a ring, because when the instrument reaches the fluid, then that fluid immediately descends upon the instrument, so that in each moment it evacuates a certain quantity of fluid; for if you evacuate more than what can be handled in an hour, quickly the patient may die from resolution of their vital spirit, or it could lead to suffocation which is close to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate that fluid according to the strength of the patient and according to what is indicated to you by the condition of the patient, the strength of their pulse, and their overall well-being.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then remove the instrument, and retain the fluid which is caused by the fact that it is immediately retained by the ligature that holds the hole on the cyst which you are advised to pierce in that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the instrument on another day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small amount of fluid, and do this for several days with caution, and be careful not to leave too much fluid remaining.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear for the patient, and leave a large quantity of water, then bury him in fine sand, and sprinkle moisture on him in bath; and let him wait in the sun for a long time; and treat him with desiccative medicines until he is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize the stomach, and the intestines near the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what has been mentioned before.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter .lv.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children who are born with unopened passages for urine.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes some of the children are born from their mother's womb with the top of their urethra not perforated (or it is straitened or not in its proper place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, when there is no perforation upon its birth, treat it with a subtle cauterization according to this method:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And place a fine lead needle in the straitened part and leave it there for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he needs to urinate, remove it and let him urinate; then return it afterward.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which passes over the area will not wash away this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But for the one whose passage is straitened, treat him with a lead needle as we have said, for several days until it becomes wider.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But for those in whom the passage is not in its proper place, as mentioned, the cause is that which is born and the urethra is at the end of the penis, so it cannot urinate properly unless he lifts the penis to one side; and it is not suitable for generation, because the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly, and this is a minor illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	Here is the translation:
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And guard yourself that in your operation for hemorrhoids, such things may happen to you; and pause there at the place where you stop the blood, and cure the wound within it so that it heals.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	About balanitis, which occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and about corruption, blackness, and adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Often this balanitis occurs in the penis as a soft fleshly protrusion.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant: suspend it with a thin thread and stop the bleeding until it dries up completely; then apply a poultice made of Egyptian onion; afterwards, treat the area with a cleansing ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the balanitis is malignant and has changed in color, then you should administer cauterization around the inflammation and its extent.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the balanitis occurs in the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis and one part of it is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then you should treat the part that is inside at the beginning until it is consolidated; and then you should treat the part that is outside, because when treating both together with the foreskin, it is not certain that it will not be injured.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if blackness and corruption occur in the genitals and in the foreskin, then you should excise everything that is already discolored, what is about to become corrupted, or what is already corrupt; and afterwards apply a dressing over it using honey, which has been crushed with ground fennel seeds and finely sieved.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And proceed with that treatment until she is well.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If blood flows excessively, apply cauterization as follows:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because cauterization is beneficial in two situations, namely when there is excessive bleeding and when the condition has become infected.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the urethra is corroded and completely destroyed, then you should insert a lead cannula into the prepuce so that the patient can urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in one whose foreskin is intact, and circumcision is not required; and when it occurs due to an infection or abscess), you should use a blunt spatula to separate them until the bond dissolves and the head of the penis is completely freed.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to distinguish them carefully, then you should use a spatula gently on the head of the penis and the foreskin, because when the foreskin is thin, it can be easily pierced due to its delicacy.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And proceed to separate the foreskin from the head of the penis using a fine thread, which has been moistened in water, so that they do not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then treat it with styptic herbs until it is healed and consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVI.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the cleansing of children and the treatment of what occurs during circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for the continuity of other diseases; but since it is part of our procedure and our will, and since it properly affects children, it is necessary to determine the best method and the least painful way to achieve recovery.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in some of their books because they do not use it in their laws, and this is only because we have acquired it through experience. The reason I have observed is that most surgeons and midwives use a scalpel and scissors for circumcision and cleansing; and they use thread with glue and incision with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already prohibited all these methods and found no better cleansing with scissors than with thread and glue in circumcision, because most times one avoids the foreskin being too tight above, as the foreskin of the penis has two layers, and remains a layer below, making further incision and certain pain unnecessary.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in cleansing which is done by alphabeti, and is digital, used by barbers, the incision at the extremity of the male member is not guaranteed to be safe, as it easily leads to internal injury.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation using a nail, you easily err and corrupt your procedure.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and many times it remains in such a way that there is no need for cleansing, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But with the cleansing that is done with scissors and thread with glue, the goodness and experience reveals itself to me, because the scissors are suitable for proportional incision, as the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below; and so when you press your hand proportionally to both sharpnesses, and cut according to a measurement at once; it is made in such a way that the compression of the glue conforms to the shape containing the foreskin all around, with which you do not err completely.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the method of the first operation is that you make the child lie down if it is one who can be somewhat understood, and that you tie the thread only on his penis, and leave that for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make him happy in every way that is possible to him according to his understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make him stand between you preparedly, and do not let him sit down; and hide the scissors in your hand or place them nearby, so that the child does not see them or any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand onto his penis and blow into the channel, and pull that inside until the head of the penis is exposed, and then clean what has accumulated there from dirt.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then tie the marked place with a thread doubly, and then tie the second ligature a little lower than that one, and then hold your finger below the site of the ligature well to retain it, and incise between the two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then raise the channel gently and extract the head of the penis; and then let the blood flow little by little, for it is better; and apply powder above and on top of the powder place a cloth soaked in the juice of hens' droppings mixed with recently squeezed rose oil; and leave that over it until another day; and treat it with treatment until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the scissors used for cleaning is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let one set of the blades be blunt and the other sharp, so that the tip of the blade does not come out, and let the length of both edges be equal to the length of two middle fingers alike.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in cleansing is that you remove too much of the inner lining, either completely or partially where you make the incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you should apply the dressing for as long as your finger indicates before the abscess in that area bursts, and then incise it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it for as long as your finger indicates, wait one inch before the abscess bursts and then incise it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed and the swelling persists below the abscess, you should leave it until the pus is ready to come out, then gently squeeze it, and incise it when you are prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the head of the abscess, for that is where it should not be done.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore, treat it with the powder that the plague consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the chapter on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised too much from the lining, and you follow the parts above, do not pay attention to that.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And therefore, treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter L VIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or clotted blood, or pus or flesh, and similar conditions as those we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and there is retention because of a stone which is in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent over his heels.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place the patient's feet on his own back and extend his belly from the part above his back, and have the patient strain with his legs as much as is possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the neck of the bladder is forced to expel the stone towards the rear parts, so that the urine can be released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if the cause of what we have said is not dissolved with water and it strongly affects the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction using an instrument called a siringua, which has this form: It should be made of silver and be thin like a quill tube, as fine as a sparrow's feather in subtlety and length about half a palm, to which a fine tube should be attached at the end.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of inserting the urine through this instrument is that you take a thread doubled and tie it to the end of the wool or cotton with good binding; and place the ends of the thread in the lower part of the siringua, and if there is any superfluous cause of the wool, cut it off with scissors and then insert the siringua gently and slowly.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And have the patient lie on a chair, and raise his bladder with it, and lubricate the siringua with oil, olive oil, and rose water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then gently insert the siringua until it reaches the end of the tube; and then bend the tube above the part where it joins; and then push the siringua into that; and then push that until it reaches the bladder, and that causes the patient to reach the empty space. If this is not done in this order, but instead inserted into a winding passage, it will not be correct.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And gradually extract the poison with the wool little by little, for the urine dries out the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And extract that and use for treatment urine, and use a cup, do not stop doing this and use a cup until the bladder is evacuated and the pain is relieved.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Regarding the quality of enema for the bladder with a syringe and similar instruments, which are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or clotted blood in it, or constricted pus, and you want to instill water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but at the end of it, it is blunt, that is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that part there are three parts: two of one side, similarly on the other side.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning it is concave, in which what is to be introduced should fit, and it should be according to the quantity that fills it, without addition, so that when any cause draws out the moisture from it, it can be drawn out, and when it is expelled, with this it should be drawn out, and when it is expelled far, as a clampcedra has naphtha applied to it in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to draw out moisture from the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the moisture, and pull with it the water that is introduced into the sides above, for the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then insert the extremity of the leather strip into the clamp as we have recommended in the circle; then apply the moisture with water that you use, for that moisture reaches the bladder soon, and the patient suffers from it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the instrument with which the bladder is treated is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or lead, the head of which should resemble a small feather, and below it a hollow tube.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take a bladder of wool, and place the moisture you want to introduce into the bladder inside it, and then tie it securely between two with strong ligatures made of fine thread, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then insert the extremity of the instrument into the clamp.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then apply your hand to the bladder with the moisture until it is structured properly, so that the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if a bladder is not available, you take a piece of parchment and make that into a circle; then pierce it all around its circumference; then insert strong thread through those holes, both ways; then attach the circle as would be attached similarly, so that you place in it the moisture you want from humidities, oils, and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then tie that to the instrument as you did with the bladder, and apply pressure with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of stone extraction.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already mentioned in the division the kinds of stone and cure thereof by medicines, and the difference between a stone generated in the kidneys and a stone generated in the bladder, and the signs of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said about the stone in which this operation is performed and its section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And thus narrating it with that kind of exposition, clear and concise.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, I say that a stone generated in the bladder primarily affects children; and among its signs is that the urine excreted from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety but contains sand-like particles; and the patient scratches his genitals, experiences painful urination, and shortly thereafter feels relieved; and these are the main points about it.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is easier to treat children with that condition before they reach fourteen years of age; and the treatment is difficult for older individuals.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in young adults, it is moderately treatable compared to those cases.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And for the one in whom the stone is larger and the treatment more difficult; And if it is small, the opposite is true.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, to reach the treatment of this condition, we begin by cleansing the patient with a diet that excludes all foods that might prevent the passage of the stone due to their inquiry.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Here is the English translation:
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Take that piece of skin which is most suitable for covering the wound, and let it be taken from an area where there are no important structures, so that the entire bladder-like structure will hang down towards the lower parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then examine it and everything around it.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	If you feel the stone in the space, then you should immediately cut it open on that.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not immediately find it with your touch, then you should anoint your left index finger with oil, if the patient is a woman, or the middle finger if the patient is a man, and insert it into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And examine the stone to see where it is in relation to your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gently move it little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on it with your finger and expel it outward towards the place from which you made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And instruct one assistant to press the bladder with their hand; and instruct another assistant to stretch the thighs outward with their right hand, and with their other hand to raise the fold of skin that is below the thighs, near the location of the incision.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a probe that has this shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and cut in the area between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle but towards the left side; make the incision over the stone with your finger in the anus, and ensure that the incision is transverse, so that the external part of the incision is wide while the internal part is narrow according to how much you need to remove the stone, as much as possible without making it larger, because your finger will easily compress the stone behind the incision, and it will come out without difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there is some stone which has angles and edges, because of which it is difficult to polish it smoothly.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And there is one that resembles a lion's paw in shape, it is round, and it is easily polished smooth.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, for the one that has angles and edges, adjust it into the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not drilled accordingly, now cover over that part, or apply force to it gently with a suitable gesture, the end of which should be like a file with which you smooth the stone without slipping; or insert an intricate curved instrument between them.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot do that, now expand the wound a little, and if you see blood flowing, staunch it by pressing with vinegar of tartar.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if there is more than one stone, at the beginning you press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise it slightly; and then gently push a little further from that point; and similarly proceed if they are in greater numbers.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, it is ignorance to incise it with a large section, because this causes the patient one of two evils: either death or that they suffer from continuous urine distillation, because the area does not heal completely.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer an expulsion to remove it entirely, or devise a fracture of it with forceps so that you extract it in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, when you have completed your operation, now fill the wound with pulp of aloes and dragon's blood, and press it firmly.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place on it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water mixed, so that the abscess may yield.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And apply the poultice to the affected area on the first day, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that bandage is removed, wash the area with water and a little oil, then apply a healing ointment made from chamomile and one made from balsam until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if an abscess occurs in the wound, which is adhesed and corroded, and it appears as if the blood is frozen in a bladder (and because of this, urination is prohibited), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if you leave it, it will cause corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with sour wine, water and salt, and apply whatever is appropriate to its condition for healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And throughout the entire healing process, you should examine both the wounds and adjust the medicines that are applied to the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and in the urethra, and is stuck there, and urination is prohibited, then treat it with what I recommend before resorting to surgery, as those treated by this method are less likely to require surgery; and I have seen this, and that you should take a fine iron probe, which has the shape of:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a triangular tip, sharp, fitted to a handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Take some wax, and tie it to the thread below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Approach the iron to the thread, piercing with ease until the piercer reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the piercer with your hand on that stone little by little, and you will make the penetration so that it allows the other side to enter; for the urine is immediately relieved.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on what is broken of the stone that is left above the thread, for that part is shattered, and it is discharged with the urine, and the illness is cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some cause that prohibits it, then tie a piece of wax below the stone and another piece above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then cut into the stone on that thread between the two ties.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then untie the ligature and clean the congested blood, which is caused by the condition.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to tie wax below the stone except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other tie above it, because when the wax near the edge of the stone is untied, the wound will return to its place and the illness will recur.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary for you to tie the wax above so that you lift the wound to the upper parts or return it carefully, and the illness will recur as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the Removal of Stones from Women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If a stone is found in any of them, the treatment is difficult at that time, and it is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the woman is very light or weak.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	The second is that you do not find a woman who is honest enough to disclose whether she has visited the doctor when she is chaste, or if she is among women who have husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation itself.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The fourth is that the location for the incision to remove a stone in women is far from the location of the stone, so a distant incision is needed, and this is dangerous.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity compels you to do this, then it is necessary for you to seek an honest and knowledgeable female assistant, and such women are rarely found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you lack such an assistant, then seek a discreet and careful woman, or present a respected midwife who is honest about women's matters, or a woman who has some knowledge of this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, present her and command her to do everything you instruct her from the examination of the stone at the beginning; the reason for this is to ensure that the woman is honest, so she should insert her finger into the woman's body to locate the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if you find that one, cut it below the joint, and now order them to incise on that one.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if it is not a virgin, now order the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and feel for the stone, as she places her left hand on the bladder, and compress that one well.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if you find that one, now proceed to gradually remove it from the bladder's opening towards the posterior at the height of its strength until it reaches the end of the issue.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then incise on that position in the middle of the vagina at the end of the issue from whichever part is convenient for you and push the stone into that place, and make sure the finger does not slip off the stone when cutting below it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that section, and if you feel the stone, now adjust the incision according to the amount you know will allow the stone to be expelled from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the types of stones are various: some are small and hard, others are sharp and rough, long and round, and having edges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Then you should know the types of stones based on what you understand and wish to convey.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see blood flowing, apply crushed vitriol to that area for one hour until the bleeding stops, and then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure you prepare the instruments that are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that they can assist you in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see bleeding, and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that was cut, then sprinkle powder on the wound and bind it tightly with bandages and compression, and do not repeat this; and leave the stone [or clot] and do not remove it, for the patient may die quickly otherwise.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the intensity of the bleeding has diminished after some days and the wound is healing, then you may return to your operation once the clot has been expelled.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	About the treatment of hernias.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia is nothing but an aggregation of moisture in the white membrane below the arch of the inguinal canal, which contains the spermatic cord, and this is called a pouch.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And in some cases, it is in the proper fatty tissue that nature has prepared for the passage of the spermatic cord, such that it appears to be another cord; and this is the inguinal canal between the white membrane which we have mentioned, and it is not like that immediately.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the inguinal region, through which this matter protrudes, and sometimes it happens due to impact on the inguinal area.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture can have various colors; the color of it may incline to yellowish or reddish, or brown, or be black and thick, or be watery and white, and these are the most common types.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this collection of water lies are as follows: for if it is in the white skin that we have mentioned, then at that moment the abscess is round, sloping slightly in length like a hen's egg, and the heat appears, because the moisture contained there spreads on all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper fatty tissue, then the abscess is round but divided like two eggs side by side, and for this reason one estimates it to be another kind of egg.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the redness of the heat and the white skin, then at that moment it is below the center.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then you should examine the color of the moisture in the abscess through a puncture where its form is preceded; and according to what is seen in the marks of the puncture, judge about what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of it with iron, then it is necessary to command the patient to be bled if that is possible for you, and to apply the body of the abscess to the vapor.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And let him lie supine on his bed raised somewhat high for some reason, and place under the abscess warm cloths.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And you should stand on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand on his right side, who should extend his hand from one of the two sides to the redness of the heat and to the part near the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a broad spatula and cut the redness of the heat from the middle location along its length near the navel.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And let the incision be made according to the rule equally distant from the line that should follow the hair of the pubis, until it reaches the white line encompassing.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And scrape that area, and observe, and be careful so that you do not incise it; and your scraping of the place where you are scraping should be suspended more and examined on the scraping according to the quantity as much as possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the white line full of water at a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two lips of the incision with forceps, and extend the white line in the parts above; and do not touch the membrane surrounding the pubis, and incise the white line in that manner as much as possible.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And incise that area entirely or in pieces, and especially its thin layer carefully, for if you do not examine the incision meticulously, there is no assurance that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the procedure proceeds from that outside of its membrane during the time of your operation, after you have completed the incision of the white line, return inside it, and then adjust the two lips of the pubis membrane with sutures, and then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the organ corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary for you to ligate the vessels that are above the suspension, and remove the organ, and then treat it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is accumulated in two separate parts, then you will know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part as you did with the other equally; and if it appears to you that an operation is necessary, then you should perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	After you have wiped away the blood, immerse wool in oil or rose oil; then place another piece of wool that you have immersed in wine and oil over the two thighs and the area around the belly; cover this with folded cloths and powder, and bind all of these together as follows:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Then take two cloths and fill them with crimped wool according to this pattern; make the ends so that they press against the skin or moistened wool, and attach them to the structure at the waistband of the trousers, one end reaching into the cleft of the buttocks, the other extending to the groin area, and two ends over each thigh, and all attachments should be securely fastened to the waistband of the trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	In some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of surgery with a knife; you should take a thin scalpel-like cautery and incise along the root of the groin, and it is ignited as we have recommended until the white substance containing the fluid becomes visible. Then you take a cautery in the following form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is shaped like the Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Then pierce that white substance with it, and ignite it until all the moisture has been expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then extend the white substance with hooks and remove it with hooks, and cauterize with a thin ignited cautery; incise as much as you can while ensuring that all of it is removed, and be careful that your hand does not touch the fire.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and longer-lasting than bleeding, and better than dry cutting.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If there is opposition to you in the form of an abscess at the time of cutting or cauterization, or bleeding, then choose the times when these oppose you least, and use the treatment that suits you best according to what has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is weak and does not wish to undergo a second operation because of its horror, then administer puncture as I recommend; and this is when you are certain, from what we have said about the signs, that the hernia is serous.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then it is necessary for the patient to sit on some raised support, and you should puncture the abscess at its lowest part below the navel, and place the incision according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the aperture be wide enough for all the fluid to drain out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then make an incision near the edge and ligate it there so that the remaining fluid can drain out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat it so that the wound heals.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is opposition to the escape of fluid at that time when you puncture it: and this happens only because the white fat in the wound opening opposes and prevents the outflow of fluid, then you should place in the wound a straw or instrument with which water from blisters is extracted, as described; or apply slight pressure to the wound with something small.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns, and it is placed for about five months or so; and when it has been set aside, then it should be pierced according to that method, because in this way the patient will have passed his days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the section about flesh hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the section about this hernia, there is great fear of danger in major cases; therefore, in my view, abandoning it and being saved by that better method.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am recalling the operation on that and the specifics of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses occur in those parts where the genitals are composed, and this is done for various reasons: either due to acute, sharp excess which is discharged into the genitals, or due to impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the skin, and there is no relief from the pain, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And when the abscess becomes stone-like, its color is dark, and there is no comfort from it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by the binding of the arteries, and by the swelling of those that are already perceived from the memory of it, or by the swelling of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But what is caused by the swelling of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and there is no need for that part to be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	May it be known that what is done by inflating a vein does not disperse for any reason due to the compression of the said vein.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible to perform a section on this particular area and on other flesh; you should incise the tendon of the genitii, and immediately place the fat above the sections, extract the white lymph, deliver the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, tie them up, and incise the suspensory ligaments after delivering it from all parts.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the fat has already consolidated with that flesh, now it is necessary for you to extract the fat and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion between any part of the lymph or between what is between the vessels, now it is necessary for you to deliver all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if it is a growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion that is behind, now it is necessary for you to incise all of that, and extract the fat as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is complete, now fill the wound with wool infused in olive oil and wine; then treat it with the other methods until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter .lxiv.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernias that involve the testicles.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is an abscess wrapped in some kind of covering similar to a boil on the soft tissue of the testicles, and it makes exercise and walking painful.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	In the treatment of this disease, one must be cautious because it is preceded by a reminder of what caused it.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, they must perform the operation as they did in the beginning.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And he says that you should make the patient sit on a raised stool; then apply bandages to suspend the testicles below; and then take hold of the genitalia with your hands and wrap them tightly around the penis as far as you judge appropriate; and have another assistant help you, stretching them out vigorously.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then incise with a sharp, narrow blade in a transverse section between the veins so that the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Then carefully remove it completely as we have said in the extraction of arteries, which is done on flaps.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Then place a needle with a double thread in it, and tie it at the beginning of the location where you act, and tie it again at the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Then incise them in the middle part with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what is accumulated from fetid and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Then treat the wound as you would any other wounds where you want healing to occur, so that the vessels that nourish one of the testicles do not become damaged, for it is not harmful if they do not.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if you act on all the vessels, then the testicles must be removed or become detached from the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nutrition due to the cutting of the vessels, and become dislodged, or attach in a way that is not beneficial for them.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that occurs in the caphac extended over the front part of the sides of the belly, because the intestines enter through that rupture.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the caphac or of its vicinity, and these two types occur for various reasons: by impact, by jumping, by shouting, by lifting some heavy object, or by similar actions.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the caphac, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and not suddenly, and it appears as an abscess within the area where the caphac compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it is due to a tear in the caphac, as at the beginning it causes sudden severe pain; and it appears as an abscess differently from what would be expected near the navel, and this is because of the protrusion of the intestine, and its contents are beyond the caphac.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And in some cases, the membrane is pushed out with the intestine, and this type of intestinal hernia is called a circumcrural hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And in some cases, it occurs with swelling, and in other cases the intestine splits open, and here it is contained, and this is very painful for the patient, and in many cases it causes severe pain, especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of these types of this illness with iron, there is fear, because it is necessary to avoid surgery in such cases.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	Here is the translation:
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	From the side cut the membrane which seals the membrane of the testicles above, and incise the membrane of the testicles entirely along its length; then insert hooks into both sides of the section as you deem necessary to open the section with them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if you make the section according to the quantity that it is possible for you to remove of that part.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then remove the fatty tissue around which the membrane of the testicles is wrapped, until the hard white capsule of each part is exposed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Now insert your finger into what seals the testicle, between the hard white capsule which is behind the membrane of the part, and between the subsequent layer, and separate any adherence that is in the rear part.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then pull back the membrane of the testicles from the external parts, and with this extend the white capsule upwards with your left hand, and lift the part with the capsule to the section; and instruct the assistant to raise it up, and you will dissolve the adherence that is behind with a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And feel with your fingers to ensure there is no cause for concern with the bowel wrapped in the hard white capsule.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause for concern, then return it to the abdomen behind.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle with a thick thread of seven threads, and insert it at the end of the capsule, which is below the membrane of the section; then cut off the protruding ends so that only four threads remain, and tie them in some figure resembling a cross; and bind the capsule, of which we have spoken as being behind the membrane of the testicles, firmly with two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Here are the extremities of the veins; bind those tightly with a bandage so that some of the veins through which they communicate cannot pass any cause from which an abscess might arise.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And then place another bandage below the first one, at a distance of three fingers from it; and between these two bandages leave an area about the size of the breadth of a finger, just below the groin, and incise everything else in a circular manner, and remove it.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then incise in the area below the groin where there is a section from which blood and pus flow, as we have described in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound and place it on the plague; and apply the bandage as we have recommended (and sometimes the area is cauterized with white cypress, which we mentioned near the incision to prevent blood flow, as often happens) and leave the bandage so that it does not fall off.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the dressing of it is delayed, hot water should be applied, and placed on it so that it stays as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with the usual methods for treating wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	On Ventral Hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this type of hernia, there is none who has dared to attempt its cure with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the earlier ones said that it should be done as we have recommended for the hernia involving the bowel; which is to ligate the veins near the section with ease; and then dry up in the proper place around the abscess that opens it, until the veins fall off.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	Regarding the treatment of wounds as we have said until they are healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	About the incision that is made in the glands.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	In some cases, an incision is made in the glands as we have said, and the location is examined.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And they do not attribute any cause of the pouches to the genitals; and if they do attribute it, it is rare; and it returns in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged with this, an adjustment of the fissure in the scrotum is made where the pouch descends into the scrotum; and this happens due to the extension of the scrotum, which is near the glands as we have said, and because it causes softening and swelling, and the area is examined.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment for it is with cautery as was preceded in the narrative.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And in some cases, it is treated with iron according to this method: the patient lies on their back between two chairs, and then the area of the rupture of the abscesses is dried using a section across the width according to the quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then stretch the white scrotum that is below the testicle until it is exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the cautery and place it over the prominent area of the scrotum, and press it towards the front of the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then apply the two prominent areas over the tip of the cautery, and stitch one to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	From this extract the extremity of the vein should be tied off, and do not incise into the depths completely, nor extend the hook, nor any other cause such as I will make you know in the treatment of an intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And in the treatment of this injury, when you incise the pus, clean that and restore the wound until it is healed; for the depth is contracted and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is best in this place, for it is nearer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the cord of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In many cases, the cord of the testicles is softened in some men because the flesh that lies within it is softened, and this requires careful attention.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for the one who is asked to treat this condition to have the patient lie according to his side, and incise the entire cord which is softened over the natural cord; and then adjust two edges with suturing.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, cut away the excess of the softened cord at three or four places and secure it with a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then incise between the sutures; and afterwards treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed and the pus subsides.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	On Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration according to our law is excommunicated, but for the reason it is read to me wherefrom I remember it in this book; and the remembrance of it is not necessary except for two ways, of which one is so that when asked about it by someone who suffers from it, the physician knows how to cure it; and the other way is that we sometimes have need of castration in other animals for our use through them, such as horses, oxen, and pigs, and similar to such animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And thus I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by cutting off, or by dividing and sectioning.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in the one that is performed by cutting off, the method of the operation is that we should scald the animal in hot water until the testicles become soft and are loosened so that they can be removed.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those [testicles] with your hand until they are separated and do not appear below the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration performed by division and sectioning, hold the animal and press the scrotum of the animal with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then lift the suspensory ligaments and make an incision on each side such that two processes are exposed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then cut those parts after you have peeled each one.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave on those parts any cause for infection, but make the castration subtle so that it is above the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration performed by cutting off is better, because cutting off leaves some cause from the testicles for which the animal desires to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Regarding the treatment of internal wounds, let them be healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphrodism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is of two kinds: the first appears where there is a space between the testicles, resembling a female form with characteristics such as hair.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And in some cases, that same place through which urine passes is located between the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, there is one kind: the part of the female organ above the pubis appears as two testicles of a man, slightly recessed as if it were between the thighs like the scrotum and testicles of a man.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	It is that you should cut away the tight tissues so as to remove the cause of that condition, and then treat it as you would other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind of men, where urine passes through a space between the testicles, there is no treatment or surgery for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On the treatment of protrusions and raised flesh due to causes related to women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	A protrusion that is slightly loose due to natural causes should be treated and managed carefully; in some cases, it becomes enlarged in women to the extent that it extends similarly to men and interferes during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then you should have on hand the excess of linting with your hand or with a lancet.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not stop at the incision, especially at the root of the hair, so that there is no flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And immediately take care of that during the treatment of the wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Meat born is meat that grows in the hollow of the mother until it fills that space, and easily spreads to other parts like a tail (and for this reason some first called it "tail disease"); therefore, we should incise it as we would with linting, and take care of it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	On the Treatment of Pterygium.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Pterygium is when the woman's hymen is not perforated or the opening is small.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	It is accidental due to a disease that preceded it, and that condition is caused either by loose flesh or by thick phlegm.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it occurs either at the root of the uterus, or on its sides, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part, and it prevents intercourse and conception and childbirth, and also easily disrupts menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the diagnosis of that condition is made by examination with a speculum, if the obstruction is apparent; but if it is not apparent, you should seek it with your fingers or with a probe.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If there is an obstruction and it is small, and it is near the two lips, then you should cut it and disrupt that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is that you place on the two lips pellets, and close by you place the fingers called indicators of both the nearest ones.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should lie on her back, with her legs spread apart, and stretch the two lips firmly so that the small obstruction is broken and the blockage is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take some linen and soak it in oil and place that on the site, and instruct the patient to leave it as is so that the cut area does not heal too quickly.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the obstruction is large and thick, then you should cut that with a scalpel or with a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to flesh, then suspend that for a moment, and cut it open.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And you should have the medicines that stop blood flow without causing harm, such as hellebore, dragon's blood, and feathers, mixed with fresh egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a lead tube that is wide so that the wound does not heal too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep that for several days and administer dry lint.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then proceed with the other treatment for healing until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes it happens in the greater part of other tissues, and then you should cut according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If this is due to an abscess in the vein, do not make any opposition to it by applying iron in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids and tumors that occur in the anus of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are an inflammation of the openings of small veins, through which blood flows continuously; and when these hemorrhoids become old, they form thrombi.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And now I have mentioned in the division the types of those conditions and the signs of them, and to say which of them receive treatment and which do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and thrombi when they are in the vicinity of the vein and do not appear to the senses, at this time no treatment should be performed with iron on them.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	However, those that are in the opening of the vein, on which one can feel a sensation, are those that can be treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary that you place the woman in a suitable position and then grasp the hemorrhoid with forceps or with a rough cloth, and incise them with razors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder should be applied to stop the flow of blood from them using one of the powders for incisions without causing irritation, such as acacia and similar substances.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then bind the area with a dressing for one hour, and afterward immerse it in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then have the patient sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peels and gallnuts and similar substances.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar to make a plaster, which you should apply to the back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the bleeding has stopped, that is good; otherwise, apply it to both sides of the navel and on the nipples without scarifying.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take wool and soak it in the juice of coriander or in the juice of anise or in the juice of hyssop with vinegar, then apply it to the affected area; afterwards, treat the area with internal remedies until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	For those who are of robust constitution, ensure that you apply what I have described in equal parts.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And treat it internally until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the piercing of the uterus in accidental cases involving the mother.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various types of abscesses occur in the mother, such as carbuncles, stone-like abscesses, ulcerous abscesses, hemorrhoidal abscesses, rectal abscesses, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already discussed these illnesses and their types and the signs of them, as well as their treatments in detail.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And what I say in this treatise about abscesses applies to those that occur in the mother when they are among the abscesses that can be treated successfully, and if you want to know how the procedure is performed with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute upon percussion and phlegm and fever, and if there is redness and sensitivity in that area, then do not proceed with piercing it, but treat it with what helps internal maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms subsides.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	During the hours when you wish to perform circumcision on a woman, place her on a bed that has two supports; and recline her on her back and arrange her feet at the part below the belly, and spread out her thighs, and position her arms above her head, and bind some of them with bandages appropriately.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Let the midwife follow on the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the birth canal is stretched, the form of which will be described in the cases that will be mentioned.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you wish to administer this instrument, place it along the line of the opening of the woman's birth canal, and ensure that what is inserted into the birth canal does not exceed its natural opening, and guide the patient carefully.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the opening of the birth canal, then place pillows around the tissue of the birth canal's opening so that it prevents the insertion of any instrument into the birth canal.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And it is necessary to place the screw that runs along the side of the instrument, and let the practitioner hold the instrument while turning the screw so that the opening of the birth canal is stretched.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the wound appears and is touched by the hand and feels soft and moist, then it is necessary to dry that area with a dry cloth.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the discharge is evacuated, then it is necessary to place on the wound a piece of cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil, which has some astringent properties; and apply a pad to the dried area near the opening of the birth canal.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Take a piece of clean cloth and place it on the wound after dipping it in water in which mallows have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And it should be treated twice a day with what is suitable for this until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the wound and the inflammation are washed with this so that it is cleansed with water and honey, and then with water in which lily root or iris root has been boiled, and then returned to the dressing.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the inflammation is deep in the wounded area, it is now necessary to avoid treating it with iron, instead using what has been described in the section on this type of care.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to treat malformed embryos in cases where there is an unnatural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of normal childbirth by its signs. When you see a woman pushing with her lower parts and desiring to breathe fresh air, and if she is illuminated by what is above her during labor, and the birth comes out head first, then you know this birth is according to natural form, and it is the delivery of it over her own head, and the second child either hanging from or suspended below the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those signs, it is necessary to compress the abdomen so that the embryo descends gently, for when it comes out head first, the second one will follow, and both should be cleansed of any excesses with proper care.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	He who lies in another part than this is unnatural and unsuitable, for when the drunkard lies on his back, his body is placed head first and feet upward, or one hand or foot above, or his head and one hand, or at his belly, and he turns lightly upon his side, and resembling the figures of him that is unsuitable.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these causes, and to guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I will show all the figures of those things, and which angle is in those by it that it is signified by this and stands upon this.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the seed is placed upon its head by natural inclination, and it is vigorous on the woman and done in a difficult part, and sometimes the virtue of it already weakened, then let that be done, or let women have it, and evaporate the essence with fenugreek juice and aromatic oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then the midwife should insert her small and split finger, or make that one with her fingernail to scrape out what is inside it of moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the abdomen of the woman so that the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not descend, then it is necessary that the woman be anointed with powder of feathers and powder of fenugreek with eggs.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command him, after the anointment, to be squeezed and make that one sneeze with conditions; and at his mouth and nose for one hour, for the fetus will be expelled soon.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both of them [the parts] are torn away at the beginning, then you should reduce them to ease little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if you do not obey the instrument, then make the woman lie on a cushion and lift her off it, and afterward place the cushion on the ground; and hold the woman so that she does not fall due to the movement.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the parts are not returned internally and the birth is retained, then incise them and extract the remains of the birth or tie the cord to one part and extract that part equally, for it will be torn away.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Remove the embryo from its position on the thighs.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the birth is on the thighs, then you should push them upward, and afterward turn the birth little by little, and then even it out, and then take hold of one part and extend them little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when it is removed inside the body, then you command them to sneeze, and make that person sneeze according to the condition, for it will be expelled if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not expelled with what we have recommended, then you should return the birth little by little until you place it in its natural position again, for it will be expelled easily at that time.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited by all that we have recommended, then take mastic and dissolved gum, and pound them together in the mortar with good pounding, and afterward apply this mixture to the woman's cervix, at the lowest part of her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And if you cannot find the navel hair in clear water, enter until you reach the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the upper parts below the skin are inflamed, apply the smoke of myrtle for inhalation and place it under them.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the smoke inhalation lasts for an hour, then place it on a piece of cloth, and afterward make them sneeze and expel it from the mouth, and remove it, and press the lower part of their belly gently with compression, because the result will be quickly expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Examine the excretion on their teeth and their hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the excretion comes out in this manner, then you should gradually introduce their hand little by little; and afterward, the woman should lean over on her side with her knees bent, and they should sit on the bed, and complete the examination of their hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then gently press on the abdomen little by little, and afterward extract what is below the knees near the ears until it is prepared in the part that is below.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the excretion is not expelled, then take their feet and move them vigorously, and afterward gently press what is above the hypochondria little by little until the excretion can be released from the upper parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then gradually introduce their hands and guide the excretion little by little, and instruct the woman to strain herself until the excretion is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Examine the excretion laterally with one of their hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Here is the translation:
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if it cannot be done, then place it on the cloth, and crush the items with strong pounding, and afterwards apply dressings made of mucilaginous substances.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if childbirth has occurred, then place her on that seat, and subsequently examine the reduction of the hand [likely referring to a part of the birthing apparatus or anatomical structure], and ensure that the delivery occurs according to its natural form, and make the woman sneeze and instruct her to push inward until it is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Also regarding the delivery, place it on the back with its sides expanded and the bandage behind its greatest width.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Let the midwife hold the hand of the fetus and then gradually turn that little one, so that it becomes easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is done and the proper time has come, then place it on the one we have recommended of oil and mucilaginous substances.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then instruct her to hold herself gently little by little, and when you have done this, place her on that seat on a cloth and tell her to lean over the right side, and then instruct her to push; and make her sneeze under these conditions.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The fetus is prepared and positioned on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you see the fear of the mother according to this method, consider it carefully, and then you incise the second part with your fingernail so that it is evacuated of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of it, then you incise that part of the abdomen, so that it is not retained and dies.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Here is the translation:
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Outcome of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are born rarely, and sometimes three or four [are born], but this is strange and seldom happens; yet these causes come from nature, not from living things.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And among those, whether they are multiples, there is a second one, and they are separated by the ciphac, distinguishing them entirely through the umbilical cord of each. And sometimes they are born this way naturally quickly, and sometimes they are born this way unnaturally, as we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some of them have difficulties during childbirth and reach the state we described regarding the unnatural figures, then you should treat them as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does what she does with ease and skill, whether quickly or slowly, and acts according to every figure as it is prepared for childbirth, leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Recollection of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and is miscarried.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes they are formed in the mother one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and sometimes ten, and it has been verified for me that a woman miscarries at six months, and another at ten months, all formations, the cause of which was determined by the measurement of the wise.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this must be known by the midwife as it is crucial for accurately recognizing such cases, and thus one should proceed with what is necessary.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the Extraction of a Dead Fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you are treating a dead fetus as we have said in the division of medication and it has not yet been expelled, and you must use surgery to do so, then you should consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and not affected by any of those conditions for which she is feared to suffer loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	At this point, the woman should be placed on her back on the bed with her buttocks raised and her head lowered.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should hold her by both legs or tie her to the bed so that her body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you should moisten the mouth of the mother with oil, honey, and mucilage made from linseed, fenugreek, and flax seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and mucilages, and then she should gently insert her hand into the mother, and then search with her hand for the place where to hook into the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And the appropriate places for this are as follows: then you should consider whether the fetus is positioned to descend head first, and if so, you should place the hooks in the hands of the fetus, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or under the chin, or at the clavicle, or in the proper places along the ribs, or under the armpits.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the descent is foot first, then in the buttocks, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	Take the needle in your right hand and place its curvature at that point which is between the fingers of your left hand, then insert it with ease into one of those places we have mentioned until it reaches the diseased area.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and insert another needle beside it, or a third if necessary, so that there is equal attraction, and not extension according to its straightness alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And let it be avoided in all parts, so that the extraction of it is eased just as it is done with teeth during their extraction.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is necessary in the place where the extension should be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should anoint some of those places with oil and insert them carefully and roll there what is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if a part of the fetus is dislodged, the needles should be moved to a place that is more suitable; and do this until all of the fetus is dislodged.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is dislocated in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to its contraction, then wrap a cloth around it; and afterwards extract it until it is completely dislodged, and either incise it at the joint of the hand or at the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do the same for the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large, or contraction occurs during its extraction, or it is in the head of the tight water bag, then insert between the fingers and cut open the head to extract the water, or use an instrument called “alundat,” the form of which will be among the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And it seems that if the bone is large by nature: then at this time it must be sawed through with a chain-saw or taken out as we have said; and next remove from the bones what remains with the forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the bone is bent and is compressed at the fork, then it should be split so that the moisture which is in the bones may be effused.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated, nor does it protrude abnormally, then you should saw the bone immediately as soon as it is possible for you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the lower part of the abdomen is abscessed or in it there is dropsy, then you should puncture that area through which flows the moisture that is within.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the bone is on the ribs, then the attraction of it is distant and the direction of it to the mouth of the artery is distant.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is compressed against the abdomen and the bones, then you should take out that blade which you have wrapped around your hand, and cut open the abdomen and the bones through which flows what is within them.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members remain still and the bone returns, then place your left hand in between; but if the mouth of the artery is open, then insert your hand into the wound, and search for the bone, and pull it with the said instrument into the mouth of the artery, and then insert an inch or two inches, and pull it with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the artery is compressed by an abscess that has occurred, then it should not be touched directly; instead, you should administer moist and fatty applications.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Apply plasters; and have the patient use waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the condition is on the side, then if possible, puncture it; and administer what we have said about the living patient.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then cut it into pieces, and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And make sure not to leave any cause inside for the second time.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your entire operation, then administer what we have said about the treatment for boils that are similar to those that occurred previously.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is bleeding, then bathe in astringent waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman in whose womb there was a dead fetus, and above that focus another pregnancy occurred, and the other fetus was also dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to one who had for a long time a boil in their navel area; and it became swollen inside with a pus-filled focus, and began to discharge pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to treat them, and treated them for a long time, but the plague did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied to them several causes of strong attraction in the form of plasters, and extracted one bone from them, and after a few days, extracted another bone; and I was very surprised, as there was no bone in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Thus, in treating the ulcer, extract the bones from it, the female bone existing in its marrow channels, and having seen this method over a long time, he corrected it with a little hand.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And it is not strange to do so, but rather in this lies the science and aid for what the physician craftsman uses his hand to administer in treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments which are necessary to extract the substance.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of a spiral in which the main one is used:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a stretcher on which he equalizes the leaves, to this equalization there are two spirals at the two extremities of two poles.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this spiral should be finer than a string, and it should be made of copper or the wood of a tree.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each pole should be two fingers, and the margin of each side should be one finger, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle of the two poles there are two adjustments made of that same wood which are already fixed, whose length is half a palm plus a little more, and the width of each is two fingers or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two attachments should be inserted into the mouth of the main one so that it can be opened by them when you revolve the two prescribed spirals.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another similar form, but finer and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It should be made of copper or wood resembling the form of tweezers.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the extremity of the bone to which it is added, do this as many times as necessary, and the length of those additions is about one palm, and the width of each is two of these.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open any of them, then you should have the woman lie on her back with her legs hanging down, which is between the thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument as you would with scissors, equally according to the quantity that you want from the size of the opening of the womb until the metrona does what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of vertigo which the ancients described:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of impelling in which the feces is expelled:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of attachment in which the large intestine is contained
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it resembles forceps, at the end of which there are teeth, as many times as necessary. And some versions are made long like forceps according to this form, as many times as necessary, with teeth like those of a reed in which is incised and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of attachment rarely used:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form with a hook having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form with a hook having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps in which the teeth are such that the head of the fetus is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of spatum having two ends in which the head is divided:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	With those instruments such exercises are performed, and when the various types of them have been multiplied and prepared by the artisans, it becomes easier for their operation and more beneficial for people according to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you should not hesitate to prepare any of those instruments, wherever they may be needed, for the necessity of them is inexcusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of the extraction of the second [incisor].
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second [tooth] is retained during childbirth, you should instruct the woman to pinch her nose and then sneeze under certain conditions. Place your hand over her mouth and nostrils, and if this causes it to come out by means of this action, that is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, take a leaf and pierce it at the edges to place over the mouth of the mother along with medicines such as chamomile, rue, anise, camomilla (camomile), Arabian scammony, cinnamon bark, and saffron.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All of these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the leaf, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a reed tube in the mother's mouth, and hold it there until the vapor reaches the mother's cavity.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then instruct her to sneeze as we have said, and the second [tooth] will be quickly expelled.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this treatment fails and it does not come out, then instruct the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or almond oil, and then insert it into the woman's vagina and search for the second [tooth] with it. When you find it, grasp it little by little. If it is attached to the mother’s gums, then proceed as we have recommended, and when she finds the second [tooth], extract it slowly so that the mother does not suffer from excessive attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Take care that it is turned to the right and left with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And it should be adjusted in the amount of attraction, for it will obey and avoid adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed, we have already recommended treatment through sneezing and medication of the ulcer with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not expelled by all the causes we have recommended, then guard against overworking on that by repeated abstraction, but rather ensure what is extruded from the mouth of the mother lies in contact with the woman's body, and subsequently treat it with enguent and tetrafarmacon; for this will cause it to be absorbed within a few days and thus dissolve and be expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it is absorbed, it rises to the head and to the stomach, and this worsens the illness; therefore, it is necessary to administer sub-fumigations and appropriate treatments for that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients already recommended sub-fumigation with nitzot (a type of herb) and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of an instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated due to retention of menstruation and secondary conditions:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of wood or ivory.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the narrow end should be placed in the vagina and the wide end above the fire, and the sub-fumigation should be placed on the coals of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep it there until the sub-fumigation is consumed, then repeat with another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	On the treatment of the unopened anus of a child.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Some children are born with their anuses not pierced, which are small and closed.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then it is necessary for the midwife to carefully pierce that mentioned opening with her finger; and if not, she should use a sharp probe to pierce it, being careful not to touch the membrane.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then apply lint soaked in wine and oil to it; and subsequently treat the area until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it is obstructed, then insert a cannula for several days, and remove it when the child needs to pass gas.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And sometimes the anus becomes obstructed due to the consolidation of an abscess or swelling; then it is necessary to incise that consolidation, and afterwards treat it as we have said regarding treatment and lead (as a cauterizing agent).
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	On the treatment of fistulas that occur below.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that occur in the lower part, close to the body or near the buttocks outside of it or in the area between them, tend to be hard and thick.
E es una fistula o motas.	And if it is one fistula or multiple.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And as that hardness subsides and there is a discharge of watery white liquid or subtle pus, sometimes these fistulas penetrate further.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And these penetrating ones are known by what is felt during discharge and by windiness; and sometimes the discomfort of discharge indicates that they are indeed such.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	Of those fistulas, some extend into the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the urethra of the penis; and some of them penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the root of the bone.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in those that are known as penetrating fistulas into the rectum and non-penetrating ones, it is when you place your finger in the rectum, and insert a fine probe of hair or iron into the fistula where there is no tortuosity.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is tortuosity in that area, then insert a fine probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair with your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel anything of this nor find any cause for evacuation, such as worms or gas, as we have said, then you know that it is non-penetrating, and at this point the treatment should be applied.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the urethra of the penis, then the significance of this is that urine will come from it, and it prohibits such that the site must be treated to consolidate.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then the sign of this is that the probe passes through here if there is no tortuosity within the bone, and causes pain in the circumference of the affected area; and that you will have pus continuously from it; and that medication does not help in this case, nor can it be consolidated by treatment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the treatment of these is hard work and futility for physicians, as such is their fate.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing with iron is hoped for as I will tell you, and this which I have already promised.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient should lie between your thighs with their buttocks higher and elevate the limbs within them, the objects being inclined towards the belly of the patient, and then introduce a probe made of lead or iron if it is in the fistula tortuosity, until you know the place where the probe passes.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that is the case where the patient surrounds the anus, then you should introduce your finger into the anus.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel with your finger that the probe has already been discovered penetrating, or what you feel between your finger and that tube or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that one, for there is no healing in that one, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some might say that it heals in some men slowly.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the treatment in which hope is placed is that you use a subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as has been described, and introduce that heated instrument into the fistula until it goes around the anus; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those inflamed tissues have become constricted like a feather quill.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then treat that with poultices wrapped in cloth until all those constricted tissues heal, and then treat that with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh, and if it heals, good; but if not, then it will not heal at any time by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters and does not penetrate further, tell which is in the anus, and between that and the probe there is a membrane of flesh or ciphac [type of cloth], and sometimes the fistula is on what dries the surface of the intestine. Now dry the intestine from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it drying along with the probe, and let it be in the fistula until the drying reaches the place where the end of the probe arrives, and through the probe it is freed and cured.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then cleanse those fleshy parts that are affected by fistulas, which resemble an owl feather quill tube, without damaging any part of them for any reason.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if blood flows between you and your operation when you are treating those flesh parts, now the method that is best and for pus an acute instrument is to cauterize with fire or with sharp medicine, because cauterizing with fire adjusts two good habits: one is the adjustment of those flesh parts being conjoined, and the other is the cessation of blood by drying out the moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then treat that with bandages wrapped in butter or honey until the area gets better, and afterwards cure the wound with a hard flesh graft that generates and strengthens.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And medicines that have the property of being styptic and drying; when these are restored, it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already penetrated into the tissue around the anus and is extended from the surface of the body, now insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore, if you feel the probe and between it and your finger there is a membrane of cloth or flesh, and it is suitable for penetration, now there is no operation to be performed here but rather proceed with confidence and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause of this is to be administered in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry it until you achieve the contraction necessary for you to introduce certain medications and proper treatment; and do not proceed with drying if it does not endanger the surrounding tissue, but perform it according to the patient's condition without causing them distress; and then treat that area with what we have mentioned so that healing may occur more easily; or lengthen that membrane and clean that pus which you dried inside near the anus, as we have said, or use a sharp instrument, and then cleanse those ulcerated tissues within the drying process where perforation is possible through pressure; and then strive to restore the entire wound by drying it out, and if the upper opening of the pus does not consolidate, and if an abscess remains in the buttocks region, it will be easier for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you introduce the probe into the fistula, and it runs along the buttocks near the surface of the body around the coccyx and at the edge of the anus, take a sharp-tipped probe, which resembles a needle prepared according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and introduce it into the affected area wrapped in five leaves or around them; and then insert the probe with the leaf into the fistula until you achieve the necessary contraction.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates the edge of the anus towards the interior, then you extract the leaf from that path as though you were introducing your finger into the anus; and you pull out the tip of the leaf and secure both ends firmly, and tighten each one, and leave this for a day or two, and when you later incise the leaf in the flesh, tighten it well so that those tissues between the two ends of the leaf heal.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Thus the treatment of the ulcer should be such that it becomes consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the orifices of the fistula are not penetrable, then make them penetrable in whatever way you have prepared, but do so gently, for you should not do this to cause harm to the patient; and thereafter proceed with treatment until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatum with a sharp spine used to incise the fistula: one part of it is sharply curved and the other part is not sharp, so as not to injure what is unnecessary, as often happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Regarding the stitching of hemorrhoids in which there is bleeding during the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids occur in two ways: either they appear around the anus like charcoal pieces, or they are like grape clusters.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And they can be small and large, and blood flows from them continuously and is one type, and they appear inside the anus, and at its extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that appear outside the anus are due to less moisture, from which clear water or a little blood mixed with it flows continuously, and their color is like the color of the skin.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit down and apply pressure until the anus opens and the hemorrhoids become visible.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you carefully use hooks or what you have to grasp them with your fingernail, and then cut those that need it along their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the hooks do not hold in them because of their humidity and softness, then take a rough cloth or a cot or a flaxen bandage, and extract them with the fingers mentioned, and then cut them and sprinkle certain powders close to the incision, as a substitute for cauterization; or cauterize them as is described in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And afterwards, treat them with other remedies until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the pus does not flow out, then incise the abscess with an incision small enough for it to discharge easily when the pus is expressed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are external, then their cause is easily treated, and you should take them with your fingernail or hook, and cut them, and afterwards treat them with the remedies we have mentioned until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for those who need suturing, proceed as follows: take silk thread and pass it through a needle, then extract the hemorrhoids at the top part, and make the needle penetrate to the other side of the incision, wrap both ends of the silk around the area below the needle horizontally; tighten the hemorrhoid firmly with strong pressure, and then tie off the silk and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this for all of them, leaving one open and not suturing it, so that the excess blood can flow out from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then apply a cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate to it; place that on the affected area and instruct the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you find it in there where it has entered; and when it is enclosed, treat those which are found or with another treatment until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the Treatment of Fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Frequently, accidents occur due to the splitting of a fissure or constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they become old and do not benefit from that medicine, now you should scrape those off with the edge of a spatula or with your fingernail until they are made wet and pus is discharged from them, which prevents their consolidation; and then treat them until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Now you should scrape off those with more vigorous pus removal than the first time until some bleeding occurs and they are sufficiently scraped; and then treat them until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the Treatment of Hemorrhoids, which is a Key Topic.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that alamermar, which is a key ingredient, and it is nothing but red spots similar in color to the body and resembling clove buds, and they are found all over the body but mostly below the waist and around them, and from these you should alleviate the pain.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Then you should incise what is within the area of the key, and hold it with tweezers or forceps, and eradicate it from its root; and then treat that area.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the following as described in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	But a verruca is a small, rough, fistulated, round elevation on the surface of the body, and they frequently occur in most children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	Of the treatment of the place which is stretched and cut there, that which restrains it with a thread or with hair that encloses.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And now the excrescences opposite and non-opposite with the instrument of which I shall speak.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	A worm called a furuncle is a small raised or fistulated swelling on the surface of the body that itches intensely, and when scratched it becomes inflamed like an ant bite, and spreads around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The treatment for it is that you take a needle of eagle feather or vulture feather, and let it be strong, and place that on the worm (furuncle) such that it contains the circle of the needle around its parts; and then rotate your hand with the needle such that you cut what is in the circuit of the worm, and place it in the itching of the flesh, and so eradicate the worm from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do this with a needle of iron or of steel in this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the end above of the needle be drawn to sharpness, blunt (that is not perforated), wrapped in such a way that on the finger it appears blunted and its rotation is controlled.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the worm (furuncle) according to what was said before in the chapter on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of the forms of the instruments that you administer to patients.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some instruments are made of silver or lead or melted and hammered metal; and some instruments are made small or large according to those to whom they are administered, for the one who is treated in the cure of small children should have small ones; and for those whose rectums are narrow or painful, their instruments should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of the large and few crucibles:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The top of the copper tube above which the bag is tied should be wide according to this method; and it should be at the place where the bag is tied as you see.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of the tube below, which is inserted into the rectum, should be blunt (that is, not open) like a lion's tail, tapering slightly; and on one side of it there are two grooves, and on the other side one groove, and the width of the groove should be according to the thickness of the rays and somewhat thicker.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines are placed should be made of animal bladder or sheepskin, and the length of the bag should be one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be perforated with threads as it is twisted; and if the space between the threads is as thick as a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those threads strong wax from fresh wax, which should be of this amount or so; and tie the bag tightly; and when the bag is placed on it, it should be tight at the top of the instrument between two distinct points with a strong knot, and then seal each thread: But the quality of sealing it is that you fill the bag with medicine according to the quantity that the patient can tolerate; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Let the patient lie on their back, and raise her buttocks with something beneath them like a cushion or pillow; then smear the tip of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or similar; then gently introduce it into the anus; then the assistant should take the bag and squeeze it vigorously until everything that is in the womb has been evacuated from the bowel; then remove the instrument and let the patient lower her buttocks to the ground.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces her to evacuate, let it do so as much as possible; and if she sleeps with it for a whole night, it is better for recovery.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you treat her for abdominal disorders and evacuation of the bowels, then repeatedly use the cautery until she is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a subtle and soft womb cloth, like those used for babies.
De curacio de las plaguas.	On the treatment of plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already stated in the division of the treatment of plagues what was appropriate for the book, and I will now describe the treatment of those with the plague using medicine according to the regimen.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that plagues are diverse according to what causes the plagues and according to the location where the plague occurs.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which such wounds are made by plagues are like throwing stones, or cutting with a sword or knife, or striking with a lance, or a stick, or an arrow, or similar to those from various causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Here are the plagues that occur in the parts of the body such as the plague which spreads over the head, neck, feet, abdomen, groin, and similar ones in the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And for that reason I recommend the treatment of certain plagues, so that you pause that reasoning and rule over other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple plagues of the head, for the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, I say that when a simple plague occurs on the head and it is not a fracture, you should consider: if it is due to being hit by a stone or something similar, and if only the skin has been broken and there is a large wound and you fear that an abscess may form, then immediately apply cupping and do phlebotomy on the cephalic vein without delay; do not postpone this unless there is some prohibiting cause for phlebotomy, especially if little blood comes out of the wound.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the affected part; and keep the patient from overeating, wine, and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some minor cause prohibits it, then reduce the amount of food and do not allow meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause treatment on the wound if an abscess forms, and apply it only to oil that has been lightly heated or to wine that has been stypticized.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if you are sure that an abscess will form, then pause treatment on the wound if it is fresh and the blood has not clotted, and the air has not changed the powder that I recommend to apply sparingly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, pause then until some signs appear indicating it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	And if the wound is large or due to the separation of tissues and similar conditions, and if the edges of the wound cannot be brought together with forceps, then adjust those using a suture as I will explain regarding the suturing of such wounds.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	And if the wound is already exposed to the bone and beneath it, and there is no need for much support but only a small suspender, then incise that and immediately treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in place of the dressing, and instruct the patient to eat food that is nutritious: meat and foods similar to it, until recovery.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the dressing and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all that is rotten and remove it, and immediately treat it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	And if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flow can occur, and it cannot be stopped with medicines, then you should inquire about the artery, and if you find that it has not been cut, then you should cut it with a scalpel, or ligate it; and if necessity compels you and what we have said does not suffice, then you should cauterize until the bleeding is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is minor; sprinkle this powder over them, as it will consolidate those before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method for the powder is as follows: take oil of henbane one part, dragon's blood two parts, and burnt frankincense three parts; mix them thoroughly and sift them, then fill the wound with it, and bind it tightly so that it adheres well to the dressing, and let it coagulate with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	From above the wound apply poultices and leave them on it, and do not loosen them while it is still such that it has not become an abscess, for medicine does not heal it until it is cured.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes this single cautery is done when it is not within your reach to get the blood and sweat of a dragon.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this method of operation is performed on large wounds when it is necessary to place them in a position and make them narrow, and for fresh wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially when it is in summer time, then there is no intention to place this powder, but at that time treat these as we have said, placing on them some cooling substances or placing on them flour of barley mixed with water and honey until they begin to rot; and afterwards treat these with the other treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if it happens that the wound is a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you extract that with a forceps.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I say the treatment of fractures of the head in what is poisonous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of wounds of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound happens in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and between the wound of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, there is no cooling treatment but rather it should be avoided and treated with something that strongly constricts, such as zinc ore and similar substances that adhere to nerves and contract them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	Do not linger over any cause of worry, for the substance of the nerves is spread out and their continuation is in the brain, which is the source of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if he is being treated with leeches, as is often done with warm water, and sometimes immersed in rose oil or non-rose oil, and then washed with warm water while the other stones are applied according to this method, and moisture is found.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, then administer stitches, or bind the edges of it, and subsequently treat it with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound is deep or there is corruption at its lowest part, then puncture it in the most depressed place.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if an artery is cut in the wound and bleeding occurs, then tie off or cauterize it, or ligate it, or cauterize it if necessity demands it.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the neck or the entire spine have already been cut, and only the veins of the neck remain intact, then you should bring the edges of the wound together with sutures over the bone of the neck without touching it; instead, equalize it and reduce it to its natural shape, and afterward strengthen it with proper support, and leave it for several days; subsequently treat it with substances that are astringent and stimulating until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has already become inflamed in the bone, then probe it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all that you can; and what is not accessible to you, leave it until the wound becomes pus-filled, and the inflammation subsides.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, sprinkle over it the powder which has been recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if a fistula has formed in the wound, then treat it with the liquid whose description will be found later in its chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	About wounds of the neck or similar ones that are made between the shoulders, whether with a spear, sword, lance, or similar weapon.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If there is a thrust wound from a spear or sword, and you feel the depth of it, then consider whether there is swelling when the injured person inhales; then you will know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth to it and the wound is recent with fresh blood, then in the first hour apply powder to it, but do not press it too hard so that the blood does not remain trapped within its depths and return to the heart, causing harm; rather, use a dressing that attracts fluids, and change this twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if a dressing is not available to you, then place over the wound opening a piece of cloth so that it absorbs any moisture; and make the injured person lie on the wound so that what is trapped within flows out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed since the wound occurred and no spasms, tremors of the heart, or constriction of breath has affected the injured person, and you see other good signs from it, then you will know that the wound is safe; and then treat it with dressings and other treatments until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if healing of it is unnecessary and much time has passed, then you will know that a fistula has formed; treat it therefore according to its chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is from a knife or sword cut, and it is simple on the surface of the skin or flesh, then treat it as would be done before suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If there has already been an attempt to clean the wound and pieces of material are still inside, now you should turn the wound and try to extract those pieces if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	但如果它们没有分离，你现在应该将它们留在原处，直到伤口愈合，因为那时取出会更容易。
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other wounds in the other limbs, the treatment during healing is as we have described.
De las plaguas del ventre.	For wounds of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The condition that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, slight, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	In severe cases, you may encounter the bowel or its nerves, which requires careful manipulation and delicate suturing.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A small disruption is difficult to handle by other methods, and it is important that reducing them becomes more difficult if you do not immediately return them to their proper place, as they tend to stiffen and swell, making manipulation difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore, the best condition is moderate, because in that case it is not difficult to reduce the bowel, whereas it is difficult in both of the previously mentioned cases.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you should know that there are four methods of suturing the abdomen, but two of these sutures are common and suitable for suturing other wounds on the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	Of two other specific sutures communicate with other wounds, but however more in the suture of the abdomen. 
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	Here is the translation:
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Thus I say that when the swelling is small and some cause has occurred in the intestine for it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then there are two ways this can happen: either due to the smallness of the hernia as we have said, or when the intestine becomes inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when this is the case, then it is necessary that you warm it in such a way that you immerse a sponge or cloth in lukewarm water alone, or soak it in hot water with cypress and spica, and apply it to the intestine until the inflammation subsides.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes it does this in cases where there is styptic quality, and it is better than water alone for resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see the inflammation resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which hyssop and mallows have been soaked, for this soothes the instrument with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the intestine is irritated near this treatment, then divide the hernia slightly with an instrument with which hemorrhoids are incised.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better, when it is appropriate that there be no cutting, and there is no need to dry out near necessity and deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, this is its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of it is sharp, and the other part is blunt, and the tip is fine, but not as fine as a spatula; rather, it should be slightly rounded.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And thus when the inflammation is increased and pus has formed outside the bowel, it is now necessary that its reduction be according to the form of nature, in its proper place, if possible in this way, for better is it.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is wide and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs further apart than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should place their head and feet further apart than the sides.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two sides of the abdomen, then you should focus your attention and consideration entirely on this so that the part where the inflammation is may be further apart from the other side.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And so you should administer this for both large inflammations and moderate ones.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And for small inflammations, prepare what is necessary, and then have the one most skilled among your assistants perform it, who should hold the disruption entirely with their hand and adjust the lips of it, and then proceed to suture it at some distance from each other.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: when you take the needle, or a piece equivalent to one in length according to the quantity of the width of the inflammation; and then lay it from the end of the ring finger, and pull the needle taut so that you do not place pins at both ends of the thread, but between both ends of the suture that is inside the wound, until you make this penetrate into that part; and when you have joined both ends of the thread and both ends of the suture, it makes four knots.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	About the length of a finger, make two circuits around the needle, and several twists on both sides, then bring together the two edges and the wound by appropriate joining; then leave the thickness of a finger and put another needle there, and tie that with as much care as you did for the first needle; and do not stop doing this if necessary with the needles until you have completed the entire contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be medium between coarseness and subtlety, for fine needles penetrate the flesh too quickly; and thick ones are difficult to insert into the tissue, so it is best that they be medium in both subtlety and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not advisable to place the needle at both ends of the wound directly, so that the flesh is not penetrated too quickly and the wound does not separate before it has consolidated.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not extend the stitches too far so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not protrude and cause discomfort to the patient; and place cotton pads over the stitches, which will cover the ends of the needles; and leave them in place until you know that the wound has consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And this type of suture with needles is most convenient for small wounds, as you can use one needle or two or around them for the stitching.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second type of suture is common: it involves managing four points in one go for the stitching—both ends of the wound and two points on either side—using a needle that is appropriately balanced in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	When you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, retract the needle from that part where you began, so that the suture retreats to the most superior part of the wound, so that the seam is like a cloth seam along which the pieces of cloth are tightly joined.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture by the amount of the thickness of the smallest finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known to be for humans.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And in such a suture, I sewed the wound that was inflicted on a man's abdomen with a knife, and the disruption of the wound was larger than one palm, and it was stretched from the bowels around two palms from the bowel of the middle part and the disruption was in the middle of the limb; then I reduced it after the bowel had protruded from the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was healed within the space of fifteen days or thereabouts, and I treated him and he recovered; and soon after that he spoke in a weak voice, and returned to his usual condition.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; but by a miracle of fire, for I did not treat him with any medicine, as it was in a place where no medical treatment was available, I placed the wound over hot coals twice a day and washed it continuously with honey water until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will describe two kinds of suture according to the narration of the Text.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin the suture from the edge, and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus when the needle penetrates into the bone and in that place make small incisions according to straightness and length of the entire body, and leave the end of the suture with which you have inserted the needle; and cause the needle to penetrate at the other end from the inside part to the outside part at the other end of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And then when you have made that penetration, now make another penetration in that same end of the wound from the outside part to the inside part; and leave the end of the suture which is in this place, and cause the needle to penetrate at the other end from the inside part to the outside part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And cause the penetration to be made in such a way that when you make that penetration into the suture at the end of the wound, it is in the part inside so that all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin from this side and take it to the other side at the end where the suture is, and extract the needle from the bone into which it penetrates, and then return it to that bone and attach the end of the suture which is on the other side to this end of the wound; and remove it from the bone which is on this side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this one time and then another, and do it one time after another until you sew up everything that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the purpose of this method of suturing is that you sew with a suture thread as if sewing skins together; thus, you sew the suture one time from the end of the bone, and leave it for another time until you have completed it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Here is the translation:
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Place the needle at one end of the suture close to you, and make it penetrate inside the body at that point, leaving both ends of the thread free; then turn the needle and have it exit from the inside to the outside through both ends of the suture.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then turn each of them around and make each penetrate from the inner part to the outer part through both ends of another suture that is on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suture is better than the common quick suture, and it is the suture about which I have previously spoken.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And if someone were to say that the suture of the abdomen is corrected with two needles, it is because you insert a thread into each needle and begin by threading one as needed, and make it penetrate through the opposite side according to the method used for suturing bodies equally.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you should know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, the suture of it is more difficult than for other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the judgment in the treatment of wounds is the same as for other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Which cause is why when you manage to treat the fresh wound with its blood before the air alters it, and reduce the swelling and sew it properly, then apply powder over it.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply some ingredients that are present before you to make it form a hard crust and dry the threads; and afterwards treat it as you would any other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If the medicines are not at hand, then wait for a short time, because it begins to form pus, and change that twice a day as you have been taught, until it is healed, so that you do not need other medication in many conditions when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the wound may affect the main limbs, then cover it with linen soaked in high-quality oil or rose oil, and place this over the area between the joints, applying it to them.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in the body cavities, and this often happens, then use styptic black thyme powder, and especially if the putrefaction has reached the cavity and an incision needs to be made into the depth of it.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that putrefaction in the larger cavities heals more slowly than that in the smaller cavities.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal when the cavity called “gugun” does not easily recover from wounds that occur within; this is due to the great number of veins present in it, its large size, the fineness of its tissue, and its proximity to nerve tissue.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what proceeds from the wound is tissue, and you obtain this fresh, reduce it according to your skill in the same way as you would reduce cavities.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed into the space and has already turned green or black, then when you apply something firm over the area that is discolored, to promote the flow of blood, because in the tissue there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Here is the translation:
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the diseases that occur in the bowel.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the bowel and it is small, it is possible to repair it in some people, because I saw one who had been injured in his belly by a spear thrust, and the injury was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had formed a fistula, and there was discharge and gas.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I treated the wound even though I was not confident in its healing, but I carefully managed that part which would heal and where the tissue was solidified.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And when I saw the place already consolidated, I warned about the harm that could arise from this bad event; and no one suffered any harm from this accident by changing their food and drink habits accordingly, and soon they were bathing and exercising as advised.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced people say that when a small wound occurs in the bowel, it should be treated in this manner: take large-headed ants; then bring the two edges of the wound together and place one of those ants with its mouth open over the two edges of the wound; thus when the ant bites onto them and clings, cut off its head because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another ant next to the first one, and do not stop doing this with ants placed one after another according to the quantity of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that and close the wound; and let those heads remain in the bowel until the bowel is healed; and do no harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	It is possible that the bowel be tied with a fine thread made from the bowels of an animal because it is finer than a needle; and you should take the end of this thread of bowel, let it be bare, and join the end to it, enveloped, and insert that thread through needles and sew it to that part of the bowel, and reduce it to the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of stitching with ants is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the fine bowels, for then there is only inflammation, and not healing of it entirely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that every wound and abscess when it matures and becomes old, and forms an ulcer, and is not consolidated and continues to discharge for a long time without being excised, whether in any limb, is universally called a fistula, and we refer to it as that abscess.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a fistula truly is a felted node, hard, white, at which there is no pain and to which there is adherence as there is adherence of bird's nest; and for this reason it is called that rough swelling, that is, sore.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in some people a moist swelling, which discharges continuously; and the moisture is excised within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And at times this moisture is pus, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is thin.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	This has been said in the division when discussing wounds, that every ulcer which is not healed nor exists on bare flesh, is due to one of these causes: either because there is little healing power in the body; or because it is harmful itself; or because between it and the skin there is tough tissue preventing new flesh from growing; or because it is made of coarse matter; or because that ulcer inherently contains pus and the material sent to it is of poor quality; or because the treatment applied is unsuitable for healing it; or when corruption sets in the region, causing pestilence; or due to the nature of the location as in Saragossa where illnesses are difficult to digest and recovery from abscesses is delayed naturally; or because there is bone within it, one or several.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And I have shown all those causes, the signs of them, and their cure with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is appropriate that I inform you about the treatment of fistulas, which is performed through surgery with my methods.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas can occur in all the members of the body; among them are those that extend to large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spine, or the intestines, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or some of the vertebrae of the back, or any of the complex joints such as those of the hand and foot; and there are also those that affect the vicinity of major limbs and similar areas.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore, among these fistulas that follow this manner, they are among the illnesses difficult to heal, and do not easily receive a cure, and dealing with them requires effort and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if any of the fistulas has a depth which does not reach to the places mentioned above and you hope and trust in its cure, and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or of steel, and if the fistula goes according to straightness, explore it with that.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	And if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of thin lead, for the lightness of its body causes it to be easily guided and curved around the tortuosity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is having movements of horror, it is not possible for you to signify upon it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then anoint the openings through its openings, for the moisture with which you anoint it will go to the other openings and spread throughout them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire very carefully according to the method by which you can know if here there is bone or nerve, and whether the depth of the fistula is distant or near, or if it is a fistula with all its openings and lies over everything within your power, within your inquiry, within which you inquire about the malady, and the cause of the pain lies under your compression on the place, and similar signs and accidental causes to the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood upon all those causes with true judgment, then proceed to the cure according to confidence: and that is that you consider now whether it is a fistula apparent near or in a salt place, distant from joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I have told you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Now you dry the fistula according to what was said before about its narration, and remove what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what has grown in the opening of the flesh or tissue and similar parts, and treat it until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of great depth and follows a straight course, it becomes necessary to incise it as far inward as possible, and then remove all corrupted flesh; afterwards apply poultices wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have opened with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this several times until the sharp medicine has dissolved everything that remains in the cavity of the fistula from the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with applications that produce healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it does not heal with this treatment, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you need to determine this, then you should investigate it and dry it out as we have recommended, unless there is any prohibition against treating a major vessel, nerve, or primary limb as we have stated.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackening in it, then you should scrape that until all the corruption is removed; and afterwards treat it with substances that promote flesh growth until it heals.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it does not heal and pus continues to form as before, then you will know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and at that point you uncover it again and carefully examine and clean it with your strongest remedy, and afterwards restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it heals, that is good; but if not, then you will know that the corruption is deep within the body and has not been reached, and at that point there is nothing left for you to do except to lay open that area.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, you can remove it; then you pull it out with fine forceps, which are suitable for that.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any behind for any reason due to your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if any cause of moisture opposes you, and in their incision there is neither fear nor hesitation, then incise those tissues or flesh as necessary, and release the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if it is not the right time for you to remove the bones immediately, then apply what can alleviate the condition over the wound, and leave it as it is until such a time when there is flesh and tissue around those bones, and protect the wound so that it does not become hardened, and ensure that the section you incised during your operation remains open.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having said that, if you are concerned, apply a cloth submerged in hot water with oil, or a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, or in one of the green ointments, because when these tissues will have become loose, and the bones are separated from them, and those adherences are loosened.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone such as the bone of a camel or cow or similar, and what is corrupted of it is only its surface, then scrape that away with a rasp only until the corruption and blackness are removed, and then repair the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if what is corrupted of it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and thoroughly incise within the place where the corruption has spread, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	Here is what is recommended to you regarding what happens when you encounter a patient in their condition so that you may use this as an example and assistance for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man around xxx years old, who suffers pain in his abdomen, and of the parts inside there is an injury concerning the matter inside the body which has reached the abdomen, and this matter is of an abscess becoming very large, and it does not have an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then time was extended in that case due to the error of the physicians until the abscess became pus-filled, and they intervened when the matter had become purulent, and his treatment was delayed until an opening was made in the swelling, through which all the foulness and moisture of the body were discharged.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the patient was treated by many physicians for two years, and none of them had knowledge in the art until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the swelling on him and the matter that was flowing from those openings in large quantities; and already his body was completely exhausted and the color of it was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the probe into one of those openings and the probe reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I immediately examined all the openings and found that they reached from all parts of the swelling.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I decided to incise over one of the openings there so that I could expose a part of the bone, and I found it corrupted; it was already turned to dust and decayed. And part of the swelling had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I saw what was hidden from me and prepared of the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I saw that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I had already reduced and exposed.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I paused the healing of the wound with medicinal substances for a long time, and it did not heal.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I re-examined and discovered on the bone secondly over the initial discovery, and found continued corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I exposed what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I proceeded to perform the cure for it and its restoration, and it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered another way and did not stop at incising the bone little by little particularly and proceeded with its restoration, and it was not restored until I incised around one palm of it, and that extract along with its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it healed quickly and became sound.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to repeat the operation and section of it except for the disposition of its fever and the lack of its tolerance and fear of death, for it suffered at all hours due to excess evacuation of syncope malaise.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus he became completely healed, and nothing remained in place of the bone but living flesh; and his condition improved within his body, and strength returned to him; and he resumed his usual disposition and did not do contrary to it in walking or harm from any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if it is a prominent bone in place of the already injured body, then you should proceed as follows: take thread and tie it at the end of that prominent bone, and instruct someone to extend it; pause with this thicker thread after the first one; then wrap the thread around the flesh near the bone, and stretch its extremity so that you pull the flesh towards the sides, thus uncovering the skin over the place where you want to cut so that the scissors do not injure the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	Place a pad or board under the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to saw through the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	You should saw over the place of corruption little by little, for if it is in the concavity of the bone where the corruption is not apparent to the senses, then you must saw from the other side.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted but not prominent, and one piece is continuous with the other, and the corruption is in the middle or part of it, then you expose the flesh from all parts entirely; then place a pad underneath, and then saw off the first part where the corruption is until the sawing of the other part continues.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the sawing be according to the location of the corruption, little by little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw off the bone where it continues from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption extends between two joints, then it is not in proportion but beyond measure.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is difficult; however, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you, and then expose that area and clean it according to each possible disposition, and adjust as needed for each case, without coming into contact with veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know which incision tools and saws to use for these bones, as they vary according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, their fineness and size, their hardness and rarity; therefore, you must prepare appropriate instruments for every kind of operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that this operation means to provide you with the specifics of the instrument of which you need; when you are great in study and long experience of the methods of this art, and witness to ways of illnesses, then you will yourself possess what is appropriate for all instruments concerning every illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I advise you at the end of this chapter to list the number of instruments which you will use as simples, among which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experiment on others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of knife:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this knife be in the form of the head of a star-shaped key, and its points should be in the form of the points of an awl.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not sufficient unless those heads of the joints are rubbed when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is large and wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of a larger razor than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another well-made saw: let it be made with the most prominent arch and the sharpness of iron, and the handle of wood should be well made.
Forma de lu:	Shape of the liver:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	 Shape of the razor, which has a curvature:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	 Shape of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	 Shape of another razor with a curved tip:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	 Shape of small razors resembling a tenta:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	 Shape of the cutter with which bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	 Shape of another smaller cutter:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	 Shape of another cutter; this one resembling a reed, and its tip is like pincers, and it is displayed in various places according to the ratio of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	 Shape of a reed that is suitable according to the ratio of that which is to be drilled into the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	 And its tip is triangular and sharply pointed.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	 And it is made of Indian steel, and similarly it seems to suit all the purposes we have mentioned for razors, cutters, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	 For cutting edges and the sawing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	 The extremities may need to be amputated either for intrinsic reasons or extrinsic causes, or if you have treated that corruption with the cure of those medicines and the treatment does not succeed, or sometimes the corruption spreads to a limb without any apparent reason; then it is necessary that you cut off that limb at the point where the corruption reaches, so that the patient may be saved from death or greater malice which would be a worse outcome for the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that which happens to him is that the member becomes black until it is burned by fire, or you may apply the blackness within so that the corruption might enter into that part where it dries up and takes hold of the whole body; and thus take care in this operation.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, it is the cause of corruption from the percussion of certain poisonous causes such as a scorpion, sea creature, or viper and similar things.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or percussion is at the extremity of the finger, then you should incise the finger and not give space for the corruption to enter into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if it affects the hand, then you should incise at the joint of the wrist and not give space for the corruption to enter into the elbow.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if it spreads, then you should incise the arm at the shoulder joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes beyond that and reaches around the shoulder, then it is death for the patient; and to administer another cause in this cure requires the proper amount of skill.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, do the same for the foot; when corruption spreads to the toe, then you should incise it between two of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it affects the instep of the foot, then you should incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it penetrates to the sole, then you should incise the arch at the joint of the heel.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already reached beyond the bone, then at this point there is nothing to do but dismissal, and leave the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of cutting or tying up the limb is that you wrap a ligature in the part below where you wish to cut, and tie another ligature over the site; extend one ligature toward the lower parts, and extend another ligature above; then separate the flesh which lies between two ligatures as far apart as a palm's breadth so that all the flesh is uncovered; then it may be cut or tied up.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it is necessary to cover the area with cloth from all sides so that it does not touch the affected site, and to ensure that the patient receives appropriate care and treatment for abscesses.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if bleeding occurs while you are working, then you should immediately cauterize the site, or apply some powder to staunch the blood; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then wrap the injured limb with bandages at the appropriate place, and take care of it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you what happens to a man in his own home, this kind of accident which I and you have advised against, the one that causes blackness in his own body as if it were burned by fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption begins primarily in his own finger and then tends to spread throughout the body.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepares for himself the possibility that the treatment will proceed to the point where the intensity of his pain and burning forces him to amputate the limb at the joint, and thus he is healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Soon corruption occurs in that part of the hand indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	Then it comes to me, and so I perforate to expel that excess with what I apply to the hand according to my treatment, near the purification of the body from it; and if the excess is not expelled, it begins to go to the other hand before going into the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And if the patient asks me to cut off the hand, and I do not want to do that, hoping for the expulsion of that excess, and also because I fear that the cutting off of the hand might lead to death, since the power of the disease was very strong.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And after he leaves me, he returns to his own land, and it is reported to me that the man prepared and cut off his entire hand, and he was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have added this narration only so that it may be assistance regarding how to deal with this disease, and to serve as an example for which it is described and according to which it should be treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids and the quality of enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess extends so that pus collects inside, and then it is broken open and perforated, and the pus is discharged from it, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin above it remains thin like cloth, and has not reached corruption, nor does it affect the bone or nerve or tendon, it is called a hemorrhoid, and it is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space extends so that corruption affects some member, it is then called a fistula and not a hemorrhoid.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And in the treatment of this, incise that wound completely as it is revolved, and especially when it is subtle and made like cloth, and make sure that it does not adhere to the place by its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you hope that the wound will adhere and that such corruption has not yet succeeded by its later consequence, and there is a swelling in the wound, then treat it with an enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And it is that you consider the smell, and if it is great, and the arm that you have is of fetid odor, then treat it with an Egyptian medicine consisting equally of oil, vinegar, and raisin, which are mixed in a vessel and cooked over fire until the medicine becomes thick like honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take what is necessary and dissolve the medicine in water and honey; and administer it as an enema to the wound, and plug the opening of the wound, and leave the medicine inside for the duration of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then take that medicine with care; and do this for several days until the wound is cleansed and the odor is removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes an enema is given with ash water when this medicine is not available to you; and it is that you take the ashes of wheat, put them over water; and then strain it and administer it as an enema until you are convinced that the wound is now clean.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then administer an enema with honey and water mixed with finely strained raisins; and give an enema of vinegar and honey mixed, for honey has the property to cleanse and wash, and vinegar helps the wound to adhere, especially when the vinegar contains a surplus of astringency and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you find that some areas are swollen and you confirm that the sinus has already burst, then irrigate that area with water that promotes the growth of flesh.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you should take a decoction of white figs and dissolve it with rose oil and vine stiptic; or what you irrigate that area with certain medicines and other decoctions which have the properties that I have already written about in the chapter on decoctions.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow and does not accept the cannula for irrigation, then you should gradually enlarge it with a small tool, and pause in there a cloth wrapped in Egyptian decoction or basilicon decoction until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly, if the orifice is too wide, then you should sew together the edges of that area with stitches and leave it in a quantity sufficient for the irrigation to take place.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice from which the pus flows is elevated to the upper parts, then dry that area in the lower place where the pus can flow down, because when the pus is restrained in the depth of the sinus, flesh will grow there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus within the lower bone area as you wish, then prepare the member so that the pus flows freely according to your ability and ensure that there is no obstruction hindering the flow of the pus.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that should be applied to the sinus appropriately, and place them over a piece of linen as desired.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the piece of linen should be of such quantity as to cover the entire sinus; then, with scissors, make an incision next to the orifice of the sinus that is slightly larger than the orifice itself; then spread another piece of linen soaked in a strong decoction over the area according to its size, and place it at some distance from the orifice of the sinus so that the pus can flow out easily without obstructing the large piece of linen until after several days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	Place above the opening of the sinus, which you should probe at all times so that what is inside the arm may drain.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know whether what flows from the arm is thin or thick, or is undigested or digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And with this, you should consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and whether it is in an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter which is discharged over the opening of the sinus adheres or tends to adhere, then on the first day you should loosen it or do so every third day, and when you loosen the crust, then change the dressing and renew the application.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if the sinus is in an area where there is subtle pus, then do not despair of its adhesion, for healing is appropriate, because some people experience a delay in the generation of flesh in their wounds, and others experience the opposite.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the sinus remains loose for several days and the arm is undigested, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and becomes prolonged, then adjust to the drying effect of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they should be as dry as a definitive dressing when applied, because there is an excess of moisture to be removed.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the most important thing in curing is to take a definitive dressing and dissolve it in rose oil, and place it over the wound as an antiseptic in its substance, and use it appropriately.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	In that action, when there is no bandage, find a piece of linen, take honey and mix it so that it thickens; or take myrrh and aloes and grind them up, sprinkle the powder over the honey which is on the fire, then stir until mixed well, spread this on cloth and stretch it over the wound; and put the linen with the thickened honey which you have cooked over the place of the injury, and sprinkle it on a cloth and apply that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes administer with the medicine a long piece of linen and roots of lily (and it is celestial lily) and flour of oats and centaury, and use those simple ingredients or adjust them, grind them up and sieve them, then sprinkle the powder over the honey which has been recommended; and use that.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the wound is prolonged and has not been healed by this treatment, then you know that corruption is in its root, and it affects the bones or other hard members or the ligaments; now treat it with fistula treatment, as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	On the treatment of paronychia and cracked nails, and the cutting of an added finger joint, and sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Paronychia is an abscess that arises from the nail of a toe or finger of the hand, and it can also occur in other fingers. When it becomes prolonged, its treatment is more difficult; it may be an abscess caused by cautery, or it may be corrupted. It generates pus inside which corrodes the root of the nail, often corrupting the entire area, sometimes spreading to the bone causing a foul odor, and making the extremity of the finger or toe rotten, with its color turning blackish.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	Therefore, when you have that which we have said in the division and do not confirm your treatment, then it is necessary that you incise with iron all the superfluous part that is rotten from the nail and immediately cauterize the wound nearby, for cauterizing is helpful in such cases.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is exposed and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail have already compressed the flesh inward, and they begin to pierce and cause pain in that area, then you should place a thin probe from below the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh, and urge it up and incise that flesh with ease, and apply upon what remains of the flesh corrosive burning medicines until it is completely removed; and afterwards treat that with applications until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already spread to the bone, then you should incise the bone and extract it, for it is never healed when the bone is corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading to the finger, then you should incise it at one of the joints according to where its removal is necessary, and afterwards treat it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if there is an injury or irritation to the nail and there is severe pain in that area, then at the beginning you should bleed the patient, and afterwards dry the nail with a sharp spatula in a transverse cut from above down, and be careful that the cut does not reach into the flesh below the nail, for you would cause intense pain to the patient, and it would become a cause for the excessive growth of new flesh over the wound; and then treat that place with something that relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	This may be adjusted, which is natural in most people, being soft and fleshy everywhere, or soft and hollow in the bones, or soft and weak in the nails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or the birth of it is in some nodes of the said joints.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is born in the nodes of the finger does no harm, whereas that which is soft and born in the joints may cause damage.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are born fleshy, the section is shallow, and it is such that you should incise them to the base with a blunt knife.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But for that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, guard against its excision.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But in that which is born between the nodes of the finger, you should incise at the beginning the flesh around it with a round incision to the bone, and then close it with one of the appropriate sutures, and afterward care for what lies within until it heals.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But for consolidation that occurs between the bones due to their rubbing against each other or because of the birth condition of the person who is born this way, or due to inflammation or burning by fire, then you should section that consolidation until the bones return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between their membranes in oiled linen so that they do not consolidate too quickly, and separate them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until they are consolidated as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs in any of them on the palm, then you should section that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suits the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of incisions for veins, such are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins are varicose, and veins wrapped thick with melancholic excesses that flow to the extremities of the body, and the greatest occurrence of them in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers and workers and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then it is necessary that you administer purgation of the body from black bile several times with strong expulsion, and subsequently bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment for them is by two methods: one is that they be incised and the black blood be drawn out, and the other method is that the vein be elevated and completely extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The sectioning is done in this way: first, immerse the leg in hot water for a moment so that the thick blood becomes resolved, which is sediment in the leg, and then stretch the patient's limb to the most prominent part of the swelling below the knee with a bandage, and then tie off the vein at one place, or two, or three with wide ligatures, and then draw out the black blood with your hand from below the knee upward into the thigh until the quantity is released that you wish and that suffices, and which the patient's strength can tolerate.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then bandage it, and instruct him to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full, and inform the patient about this.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But the elevation of them is done in this way: first shave the leg of the patient if there are many hairs on it, and then place him in a bath or immerse the leg in hot water until it reddens and the veins become prominent; or have him exercise vigorously with exercise if a bath is not available, until the limb becomes warm.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And in a gash made along the side of the vein by cutting either lengthwise or behind it you should use the scalpel, or at its base you should use the cautery.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And when you open it with hooks and scrape the vein from all sides until it appears to the touch, and you should notice its appearance declining to blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And thus when you expose it and from the wound you see that white one which is the membrane.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you place the ligature below where it is elevated and turned from the wound, and suspend it with hooks for one hour.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then make another incision near that incision at three points, and then scrape the wound above the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then elevate that and incise it at the rear incision using the cautery, and then extract that and elevate it until it comes out through the second incision, and then extract that from the incision above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract it from the incision that is highest or farthest from all the incisions, until everything comes out; and then incise it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if it does not obey you to extract and elevate it, then insert a needle with a strong double thread and tie it and extract it, or insert below the ligature and move your hand in all directions until it is dislodged.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to elevate it, and the harm will have come about because of this injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all that is done, place over the site of the wound a piece of wool soaked in wine and rose oil and plain oil, and care for it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vessel is contracted with tortuosities to which there is an envelope on the parts, and it does not follow straightness as we have said, then you should cut along each part of the tortuosity and at the places where the envelope is, and then lift it up by hooks until you elevate the whole.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful in your section that you do not incise the vein and that you do not injure it, for it will be difficult for you to elevate it; use your prudence in this.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The shape of the incision for cutting the vessel:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of hook:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not sharpened like hooks nor has a sharp tip so as not to injure the vein; and it should be of thick flexibility like a lion's, for if it were fine, it would cut the vein because of its fineness; however, it should be in excess of thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of the extraction of the leg vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is found in the legs in warm countries such as Al-Ategi in the land of Arabs and in the warm and dry lands of India where no grass or vegetation grows.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And this vein is generated in other parts of the body apart from the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the formation of it is by putrefaction that occurs below the skin, just as worms and vermin come from within the body between the skin and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	Here is the translation:
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	Then when it appears at the opening, you must wrap around that a piece of lead weighing one dram, and entering two drams, fix that and leave the lead suspended from the string.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as you go out to any place for some reason, wrap that in lead and fix it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is elongated, then you cut a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not cut that too far in until it has come out, for if you cut that too short it contracts and goes into the flesh and causes an abscess and corruption in the place and a bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Therefore, it must be treated gently and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the body and there remains no cause for concern in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein it emerges in some people to a length of five palms and I have been told that one reached twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut during the time of its treatment, then insert the rod into the tract and perforate that along the length of the body until all that is in the material is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the area with medicines for several days; and subsequently cure that as you would an abscess.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and it comes out through multiple openings, and is branched from each opening.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And thus cure that as we have said in the division and according to what has been mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the incision above worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is called in some lands bovine disease because worms are often found in the cattle, and one of these worms is born between the skin and the flesh, and moves throughout the body up and down, and is felt by the sensation passing from limb to limb until it breaks through the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is from the putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, and larvae and ascarids occur in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared because of its malice, for when it moves through the body and rises to the head, and reaches the brain, then suddenly it lightens within it and enters and destroys the brain, and this is why many fears occur.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And so when you want to cure that and extract it, then it is done according to the movement and appearance of it to the sensation, and then you should press what is above it and what is below it firmly with bandages and constriction, and afterwards dry over it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is deeply embedded in the flesh and you cannot find it, then you should apply cauterization with fire over the area where it resides, and the main cause of fear is its corruption, by which it corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you see it approaching the head near the brain, then press above the eyebrow with firm constriction, and afterwards dry over it, and extract that; and the patient should use purification of his body with medicines evacuating bad putrid humors, and guard against foods generating putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On incision for the disease nafir.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called nafir in our homeland, and it is a pain that occurs in certain limbs, and it often changes from one limb to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I will now describe that illness as I shall recount it to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to attend to a sick woman in a village, and when I uncovered her arm, I saw a small inflammation in the funis vein of the arm. After it had been ruptured for about an hour, I observed that this inflammation spread as quickly as wax would melt and rise up, but more rapidly than could be expected, like living silver flowing from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain moved from that location to the muscle, and it stayed there for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it spread to the other parts of the body until it reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then she told me that it was moving throughout her body as I had observed, and I was greatly amazed by the transformation and the speed at which it moved from one limb to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had seen something similar before in my own patients in that manner, but I have never seen the pain transform from one limb to another as I did then.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I have not seen anything like this in my other patients as I did with the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I thought that this was due to the fact that the woman was of advanced age, with multiple ailments and exposed veins, and in such conditions, one might experience a transformation of sensations.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that there does not appear according to this retroversion in those who are delicate and whose flesh is thin and the veins prominent.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to perform the treatment on it, and the patient feels that pain, at that moment do not proceed as we have said, but instead press strongly on it and evacuate that trapped air until it is released, and then cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not perform it with your hands, then treat that by inducing vomiting and expelling the air, and also use preparations to remove foul pills and senna pills and similar remedies.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of the extraction of splinters.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Splinters vary according to their types and the parts of the body where they lodge. Their diversity is such that some have large points, others small points, some are concave, and others blunt; some are solid, while others have three angles; there are also those with tongues or star-like shapes.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And the treatment according to the members and parts of the body where they lodge is in two ways: for the main members or principal organs, such as the brain, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, ribs, bowels, bladder, and similar; therefore, when you find a splinter in any of these members and you see signs of death, which I will describe shortly, it is necessary that you avoid extracting that splinter when death may quickly follow if extracted under the worst conditions. However, when no such bad signs appear to you and the splinter is not hidden deep within the member, then you extract that splinter and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of concussion are when it strikes in the sagitta, and penetrates the bone, and exits through the sinciput which is above the head, because there occur soda vehement, and scotomia, and vertigo, and rigidity in the eyes, and inflammation and rigidity of the tongue, and spasms and mixture of understanding and vomiting of bile, and it easily severs speech and destroys the voice, and exits from the place of the injury moisture white like dust, and there appears on the face an aquosity of the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And so if these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the signs of the arrow when it strikes in the heart, so that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it were fixed in a hard place, not in a soft one; and very often the movement of the arrow is like the movement of a pulse, and there flows from the wound black blood, and chills those extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting; and thus you know that death will come soon.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are that foam of blood comes from the wound, and the veins near the neck become swollen, and the complexion changes, and he exhales a great sigh, and seeks to draw in cold air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow strikes in the diaphragm which is in the chest, and the pain then is near the small ribs, and it causes great and violent pain and sighing, and one cannot move any of the body's muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow strikes in the stomach, then very often food that is undigested appears at the wound.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow is embedded in the belly, and it is fixed within it, make some incision in the wound, or the membrane, or the vessel which is ruptured, and there is no hope for the cure without extracting the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow is embedded in the bladder, and urine comes out from it, and the process occurs due to some cause affecting the parts outside, and pain becomes severe over the injury, then you know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	And the other members as well, such as the face, the neck, and the shoulder, and the shoulders and the helper muscles, and the vertebrae of the back, and the clavicle, and the ribs and similar parts of the limbs, are saved according to the best dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recount this to you as I have observed about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand through this about your own treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The reason for this is that in a person who was hit by an arrow at the lacrimal bone near the root of the nose, I removed it from the other side, left the gray matter of the ear alone, and he healed without any damage to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had struck him in the gray matter of his eye, leaving the eyelid intact. The arrow was deeply embedded and could not be completely removed; only a small part of it remained attached to its shaft. It was a large sharp arrow of the Turks, made of iron like a lion's claw, which did not have feathers.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew recovered, and there was no adverse effect on his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	About extracting one arrow from a Christian man who was struck in the groin, and it was an Arabic arrow, and it had feathers on it; then I incised between two grooves, and it was submerged in his flesh there; then I carefully removed that, and the Christian man recovered.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who was struck in his abdomen, and I thought he would die from it; but after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition for the worse, I incised around the arrow and engaged with it, and he recovered, and no further harm came to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow was embedded between two parts of his body, and the wound had healed over it, and after seven years had passed, the arrow emerged at the root of the injury.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow was embedded in her abdomen, and the wound had healed over it, and there was no change in her condition for the worse, and the woman did not suffer any harm from any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow was embedded in his face, and the wound had healed over it, and he broke the arrow without feeling any pain, and many similar cases are like this.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the prince of the king who was struck in the middle part of his nose, and it had already shifted slightly to the right, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for his treatment regarding the embedding of the arrow within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then I touched the wound of the arrow with a narrow probe; then I examined it carefully, and did not feel anything there; but she felt a prick below her right ear, and then I hoped that that pricking was at the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And he plastered the place with an adhesive and digestive plaster, persuading me to put the place where the abscess appeared by him on the arrow wound, so that it might dry over it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And no significant accident occurred at the site where the arrow had reached; and I continued with the plaster on it for several days without any incident; and as the wound healed, after some days' time, one day he felt the arrow within his abdomen and reported this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied acute and corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it healed, and with a probe I probed that area, and found the tip of the arrow delicately adhering to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And soon I adjusted the appearance of the wound with that acute medicine until the tip of the arrow became visible to me, and it took me four months for this to happen.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And when the wound had healed sufficiently, and it became possible for me to insert forceps into it, I did not do so immediately but rather continued to carefully consider and devise methods of extraction, until one day I began to use specially made forceps to extract it in a manner described at the end of this chapter; and then I restored the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some surgeons judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, and I restored it, and the wound was consolidated, and the patient recovered completely, and there was no need for further treatment.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows in order that you may understand this rule and its meaning regarding what I have not mentioned, for the parts of this art and the definitions thereof are not comprehensible without narration nor can those who read this book understand them.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise craftsmen compare little by little; and what is present with what is absent; and when new operations and new instruments are discovered, they should trace back to the causes of these novelties in the art.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not extracted from the members in which they are embedded except in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they intersect; or by the opposite of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is extracted by the place where it entered, or an arrow proceeding in fleshly tissue, is drawn and extracted.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not observe the hour at which you catch it, sometimes it is better to leave it for several days until the flesh around it has healed and lost its attraction to it and its extraction.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is embedded in bone and you do not observe the proper method, then leave it for several days and gently move it according to its attraction each day, and it will eventually be extracted.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not observe the proper method for several days, then it is necessary that you perforate around the arrow in that bone from all sides with a fine awl until the space around the arrow is enlarged, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is embedded in the bone of the head and has penetrated one of the ventricles of the brain, and you observe any of those symptoms which I have mentioned, then refrain from extracting the arrow and leave it inside until its natural course takes place for some days; because if it reaches the citadel, then death will not be delayed.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is embedded only in the bone of the body and does not penetrate into the citadel, and the patient remains for some days without any cause of those accidents occurring, then you should devise the removal of the arrow and of it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is embedded and you do not adhere to its removal, then you should administer treatments around the arrow as we have recommended, and take care of the area until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is hidden in the part of the body and is out of reach, then you should search for it carefully, and if you can feel it, then move it with some instruments that are suitable for its removal.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the shaft, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein here, then you should enlarge the wound until it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is necessary to remove the arrow along with those that are attached to it, then you should excise the flesh in which it is embedded as completely as possible; and devise a way to do so, if you cannot avoid cutting through the flesh over fractures of the bones and twisting them until you can proceed.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you perform the extraction of the splinter in whatever place it may be, then you use both your hand and forceps to all parts so that it obeys; and gently with gentleness that the splinter is not broken and that it is made difficult for you and for its extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do this at that time, then leave it for several days until the parts around it become less inflamed, and then repeat what is now easier to perform.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if there is contrary blood flow, then you administer what we have said about the treatment in its respective chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your skill in incising veins or nerves, or cords, and administer means in every possible way to avoid the extraction of the splinter; and do this with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness as I and you recommend.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, make the splinter retract so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you should place the splinter in it, for this is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But splinters that are ejected by the opposite side, or which you have already processed some part towards the outer parts, or cause inflammation at the extremity of the splinter due to the feeling from the upper part near the bone and raise it; then you cut on that; and let the section be according to the amount in which the forceps take hold; and then pull it out, for it is made easy by this method.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is retained in the bone, then at that hour turn it according to its opposite direction until the arrow penetrates the bone, and expand it as you insert it, and thus extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for several days and then attempt to extract it when the flesh has softened.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is there, then push it out with force.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft is broken and you want to apply force, then insert something, if it is blunt, use a concave instrument so that it fits into the curvature of it in the head of the arrow and then push it out with force.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the arrow is convex, then push it out with a strong instrument by inserting it, for the arrow will be easier to remove because of this.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then make sure to hollow out all the flesh in which the poison is present, as much as it is possible for you to do so, and then treat it with what seems appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow strikes in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side, and is close so that you touch it through the skin, and it is possible for you to operate on it, then cut around it and be careful not to injure any veins or nerves, and extract it, and afterward treat the wound as seems necessary, and cure it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps with which arrows are pulled:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the extremities of the forceps be shaped like the beak of a bird, which is made like a clamp so that they do not let go when grasping the arrow.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	Of those are made various kinds of hooks, large, few and medium-sized, according to the quantity of the arrow's size and the scarcity of the sinew, and the breadth of the wound, and the constriction thereof.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The shape of the concave part of this extremity is curved like an owl's feather so that the instrument of the arrow may be guided easily into it, and the force with which it is pushed:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape of the pushing blunt extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	like an arrowhead so that the instrument may be guided easily into the concave part of the arrow and is pushed in that manner.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	On phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for phlebotomy of which it is customary to perform phlebotomy as follows: xxx, in the head sixteen, two pulsating veins which are near the ears, called alhasisain; two veins visible on each temple; and two veins that are at the corners of the eyes, called aspicientz; one vein located in the middle of the forehead, and a vein at the tip of the nose; two veins on the neck; two veins on the upper lip; and two veins on the lower lip; and — these are the veins called algelic — ; and there are also two veins below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The veins that are phlebotomized in the arms number five. Of these, one is a cephalic vein, which they call the wild latus; and people refer to it as "the head vein," and it is also called a median vein, composed of a branch from the basilica and another branch from the cephalic; and people name this "the vein of the whole body." The basilica vein lies on the domestic arm and is named "citillar"; common people call it "the belly vein." Another is the funis of the arm, which lies above the elbow, in which phlebotomy is performed, and it appears prominently over the wrist. And there is also the salvatella vein, which is located between the thumb and the little finger, appearing on both sides.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And on the back and in the groin there are three veins; one of them is that which is behind the curvature of the rib cage; and the second is sophena, and its place is behind the groin of the domestic animal; and the sciatic vein, and its place is behind the groin of the wild animal; and in the groin there are other similar veins.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The treatment of the veins that are near the ears is for catarrhs, migraines, fevers, and old ulcers of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of treating those veins is as I recommend to you: shave the head of the patient, and rub the head of the patient in the occipital region at the place where both veins are with a large piece of cloth for good friction; then tighten the neck of the patient with a bandage so that the two veins appear near the ears in two places on the back of the head; and feel those veins with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your finger, here is where you should proceed.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the lancet, and it should be sharp, and then insert it behind the vein into the tendon until the blood flows to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then raise your hand with the vein and the tendon towards the upper parts and incise the vein with a sharp incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers, adjusted or around that amount; and let as much blood out as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then apply pressure with powders and keep it compressed until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	In this begins the chapter on the cautery and its applications.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But the two arteries near the temples are used for phlebotomy in cases of migraines, ancient and severe diseases, and frequent ophthalmia, as well as acute accumulations of superfluities flowing to the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those arteries I will now recommend to you: instruct the patient to hold his breath so that the two veins become apparent by a clear manifestation and feel the pulse below your fingers; then at this moment attempt it.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then raise the edge of the knife above the vein towards your indicated finger, and insert the phlebotomy incision below, raising the vein up; and make the cut in it as you did with the other two veins; let the blood flow according to the quantity needed.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then loosen the patient’s restraint, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and afterwards place it on the cut and poultices, and bind it strongly above with a bandage, leaving it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And now follows the description of them, and the incision of those veins at the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus the phlebotomy of the frontal vein is also used for the cephalic vein in ancient diseases of the face and for migraines, stiffness, and foul ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of phlebotomy on it is as I will recommend to you: the patient should hold his breath with a cloth so that the vein becomes visible; then take the instrument called a lancet, which has this form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the puncture at the point where it reaches the vein above and strike it either on one side or another for that purpose, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; then afterward release the patient from the puncture and bind that area until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And in some cases, a femoral incision is used, but it is not necessary for the femoral incision to be sharp like other incisions; rather, it should be flat. Make that incision transversely because the bone is close and strong, and you would easily break it with a sharp incision.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	However, the treatment of the two veins that are near the tear ducts of both eyes for conditions such as itchiness of the eyes due to irritation and oiliness in the eyes, and for illnesses of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the incision is that the patient should hold their neck with a bandage, and then make those incisions while you stand above the patient's head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the incision should be made transverse to the length in a few places, slightly apart from each other, because in that area there is little flesh; and if the incision is sharp, its tip would easily break the bone.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and pause when it reaches those points, and bind those areas for one night, and then release them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	However, the incision of the vein in the nose is appropriate for acute fever and violent headache, and for illnesses of the face and migraines and pain that occur in the face, especially when they are chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	Of the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient strains his neck and approaches it to his nose with your left hand, and take the phlebotomy needle slender long and put it in the middle place of the nose tip according to straightness, for the vein does not appear to the sense here, and for the blood begins to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Move your hand with the small phlebotomy needle little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; and afterwards leave it for one night, for it is quickly restored.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The harm of excessive phlebotomy leads to constriction of the veins and the beginning of leprosy, and to many other diseases and impetigo and bad corrosive ulcers as well as herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The quality of phlebotomy in these cases is that the patient strains each side with his neck; and let the practitioner stand over the head of the patient, and let the patient sit upright on a chair.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then phlebotomize the vein with a slender needle little by little; and afterwards extract blood according to the season, quantity, or according to what you find necessary for that purpose; and then do the same for the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then loosen the ligature and stretch both veins with moderate pressure so that the patient is not overstrained, and leave him in bed because the illness is cured.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the harm of phlebotomy from large veins applies to small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers, and cracks, as well as bad ulcers that occur in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	Of the quality of the phlebotomy of these is that you face the patient before you, and strengthen the neck of him with a bandage, and then revolve the lips of him and regard two veins of which one is of the right of the lip and the second of the left; and the demonstration of each one is by the blackness of each of both, and this more so because in the circuit of those very veins small black ones; and then incise each one with an incision incising.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If doubt is before you, and you do not know which one it is of those, then you must perform the incision on the larger of those, and from the most apparent of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the appearance of the two veins that are in the upper lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	However, it is more common to incise both veins that are in the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But of the two veins that are below, the tongue's movement is close to the phlebotomy of the cephalic artery in preference to those in the throat, to diseases of the uvula, and to diseases of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those is that you place the patient between your hands facing the sun, and raise the tongue of him, and look below the tongue, on one side a vein and on the other side a vein, and the color of each one inclines to blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then phlebotomize each one; and be careful not to go too deep when phlebotomizing those, for below those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are phlebotomized in the bend are usually found in all men, and the phlebotomy of theirs is done according to two methods, either place on the phlebotomy site a small round plug like a bilberry or olive in subtlety; or use a knife for phlebotomy, and check if it bleeds, and this is the form of it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this is what you should do for sectioning, and of those use special knives and subtle ones according to the width of the veins and according to the constriction of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Method of midline venesection:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Use the knives as mentioned before, and you should open the concave full veins coming from thick vessels, and those that contain thick coagulated blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the method of olive venesection:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this venesection is of lesser width and has a more subtle tip, and it should be used for the venesection of fine veins that contain thin, citrated blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	But the benefit of venesection of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: for it extracts blood from diseases below the jaw and neck, and from what dries the legs and abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And the venesection practitioner should be very careful when performing venesection on that vein and have great fear of it, for there is an artery nearby. If he errs in puncturing the vein, he may cut into the artery and cause a hemorrhage. Therefore, it is necessary not to perform venesection with a piercing instrument but rather with a cutting one like a knife.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear clearly, then you should leave that one and switch to another, or search for a branch of it. Or perform venesection at the end of the arm where it is visible; and proceed with venesection using a knife as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you want to perform venesection on the forearm, then place your hand in front of the bend of the arm so that you touch the area between where you know the pulse is, and just above the tendon; then hold the arm steady and section the vein at a concave part for venesection as we have said; and be careful not to strike the artery in any part of its location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you press, with firm pressure on the area that you marked above the tendon, if there is swelling in that place, then that swelling is arterial swelling, and therefore avoid that area.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flow during venesection as thin and bright like a child's urine, then you know it is arterial blood; at that moment, stop and rest your hand there for some time; then remove your hand, and if the bleeding has stopped after a few moments, then press the arm and leave it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And warn the patient about the danger of this, and advise them not to fear it excessively but also not to engage in heavy work for some days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	And if the blood does not stop and you are without medical help, then if the artery appears to you, cut it, as the extremity is contracted and the blood has stopped; or take some cloth, fold it, and take one half of it and press it on the vein at the point of constriction with your hand and with poultices on the other side.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the blood has stopped, that is good; but if not, then treat it with what has been previously described for stopping the flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The removal of the bone in many cases is difficult due to the small space of the wound and the possibility of binding the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	For the dark vein, phlebotomy is a beneficial method to extract blood from the upper part of the head and from below the chest; this is composed of branches of the basilica and branches of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And it is necessary for the phlebotomist to be overly cautious in performing phlebotomy on this vein, because below it lies a nerve; and then if one presses too hard during the puncture of the phlebotomy and hits the nerve, it will cause stupor in the patient, making recovery difficult, and rarely does he recover completely. And this nerve is often felt; but if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and not shown, now you must stop the phlebotomy at the place where you are performing it near the elbow, and avoid hitting the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should puncture the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of phlebotomy from the cephalic vein is that it extracts blood from the head and relieves eye diseases.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And it is proper that if you want to perform phlebotomy, you do so at the olive vein or the myrtus vein puncture site; for this is the safest of all veins, as it is not near any artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is necessary for you to perform phlebotomy in such a way that you do not puncture only the head of the lizard vein, but rather seek the place farther away, and do not note it unless it is hit upon by percussion at some previous attempt during phlebotomy.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, sometimes a tumor appears in some people, when it is not detected by the first examination, but we do not notice that tumor.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	However, the quality of that phlebotomy and its consequences, in which one must think about their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first is that you should know that phlebotomy is administered only for the preservation of health and with the hope of benefit and caution against the onset of diseases. Phlebotomy should be performed on one of the veins in the arm, which are: cephalic, femoral, and basilic. Phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter near mealtime, when signs of fullness appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or at the first hour of the morning, after three hours have passed.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	However, phlebotomy that is administered should be done when there is convenience and necessity for it, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and at any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it should be that an infant should not be phlebotomized until they are fourteen years old, and a woman who is pregnant should not be phlebotomized except from the fourth month to the seventh, and elderly people who have passed sixty years should not be phlebotomized.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wants to be phlebotomized in any way, it should be that they cleanse their bowels before phlebotomy with a warm enema if there is retained feces in them, so that the veins do not carry superfluous substances during the phlebotomy of the cleansed bowels and do not affect the principal limbs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	Do not perform phlebotomy on patients who are suffering from seasickness or drunkenness, nor during the onset of an illness or after drinking heavily when what they need is to retain what is in them, nor for illnesses caused by water retention. Also avoid phlebotomy near colic pain and vomiting, as well as conditions affecting the bowels, and do not perform it frequently due to excessive sexual activity, work, exercise, fasting, or staying awake, or any other cause that weakens either their physical strength or vitality.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And take into account the subtlety of the condition before deciding whether the blood is thick, and regarding food and drinks, as well as medicines, if it is possible to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And afterwards, take a bath if no cause prohibits it, or exercise in some way to make the blood thinner.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And avoid performing phlebotomy at the end of the day, around the hour of terce, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And ensure that the patient avoids any harmful animal accidents on that day, such as bites or stings, as well as all physical exertions and unnecessary labor, sexual activity, and similar activities.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at the time of sitting down, have present the causes that are used in the custom of men for aromatics and odors, as well as balms and similar substances according to the quantity and possibility available.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And the person performing the phlebotomy should sit on a higher seat than that of the patient who is to be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And afterwards, extend the patient's arm, and have it washed by the phlebotomist two or three times with their hands; then wrap the arm with a bandage twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let the ligature be timely, for if the ligature is not equal or the ligature is too tight, then you prohibit the flow of blood; or if it is too loose, and then you prohibit the consistency of the blood as well.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And regarding the ligature, it is necessary that he who is to be a phlebotomist wash his hands thoroughly before so that the veins are inflated and become clearly visible.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And concerning the phlebotomist, he anoints his lancet with a little old oil properly. Then he places his thumb on that vein at the spot where he intends to perform the phlebotomy so that the vein protrudes slightly, and the percussion is set because of the veins which feel like cords fleeing from the phlebotomy; and those are full of air bubbles. When he presses the lancet onto it, if it does not yield, then that one is narrow and the phlebotomist is revealed as unskilled; and the lancet does not enter the vein, and if it enters, then that one is constricted.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be careful and diligent in all these matters.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then apply the lancet, but if the vein is hidden in one spot, then proceed with caution; and if not, repeat this at another spot nearby, or over an area of congestion, if that location is not abscessed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is abscessed, or if the condition worsens, then you leave it for one day or two, and do not bind it tightly, for it will soon draw an abscess out, nor should you enter a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	Regarding arterial incision, if it is needed.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the incision is small and blood flows gently, and you fear that not enough blood will be released, then repeat the arterial incision in that place straight away and adjust the incision slightly larger, and do this quickly before the area becomes inflamed, for the area often becomes inflamed after a small incision.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if you see that it is already inflamed, then do not incise there again, for it will serve you no purpose; instead, apply some part of the oil poultice to it, for it aids in dispersing the blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And in this case, oil is better than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, apply an oil poultice to all arterial incisions where the blood flows are prohibited by the body, and use either theriac or sage when applied over the area, for the blood becomes finer and is dispersed when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large abscess is formed in the area of the arterial incision, which often happens, especially to those who have not been bled before or who had only a small incision on the vein, then you should cut it open, and apply a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly heated, to the area for one hour, as it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And it is necessary to do this after the blood has flowed from that vein until it is complete or from another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if a black or greenish discoloration remains in the area for several days, do not be concerned about it; and if you wish, apply some preparation of aloes and frankincense dissolved, or some preparation of mint juice or camphor or something similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And from these swellings abscesses and elevations arise, requiring phlebotomy at the base.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore apply your hand on that spot, and if you find softness there, then apply pressure on that spot. At this point, the elevation is bad and harmful; and be careful not to place anything as mentioned before, for blood will flow easily from an artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply a plaster with styptic properties to that area so the spot becomes hardened, and treat it with the other methods until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And it is necessary to extract blood from a person according to the quantity of their vigor and according to the color appearing on top of the blood.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, then let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see it thick, then let it flow until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is acute, until the sharpness of it is alleviated.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And for one who is robust and has the need for bloodletting at once, the phlebotomy of the vein should be increased and the procedure should be done slowly.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for one who is weak, the opposite should be done, and it is necessary that the bloodletting be done in small amounts, and that the procedure be quick.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best method to use in venous phlebotomy is the cross-section cut, not puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy is safe from excessive blood flow and injury to nerves, and it is more effective and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	To which it often happens that fainting follows the phlebotomy, and you should treat that beforehand with a little bread infused in pomegranate juice or simple oxymel heated; and extract from the place of the blood in three or four applications.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is cold in constitution, then before the phlebotomy take bread infused in myrrh syrup or in aromatic honey sweetened with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and the like, or in an aromatic syrup with a good scent.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs after the phlebotomy and is caused by the effusion of bad blood, then you should have them drink watered-down syrup with a subtle good scent; use aromatics like rose petals, and let them sit quietly with that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting due to evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And for one who wishes to alleviate their condition and dissolve their blood a second time, it is appropriate for which the phlebotomy is for bad evacuation, and the effect of this is that it gradually evacuates the blood in small amounts, as is according to the quantity of its power over continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But for one who wishes to alleviate their condition and reduce their blood a second time, and whose body is strong, then this should be done about seven hours or nine after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But for one who wishes to draw the blood from their body in the opposite direction to the side towards which it inclines, it should be alleviated on the second day or the third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	May that body in which the blood is heated and inflamed and causes fever be bled at once, and let a large quantity of blood be drawn so as to prevent fainting, but ensure you maintain all conditions appropriate for phlebotomy; and place your hand on the patient's pulse while he loses blood from his body, so that he does not die instead of fainting, since this happens often when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And when you wish to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, since the orifices of the vein are now closed and it is difficult for the blood to flow out, do not press too forcefully or bend it abruptly, for this is harmful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Handle the release so that a second phlebotomy can be performed; or it may be due to the inflammation of the phlebotomy causing coagulation in the vein's orifice; or pause on that spot with honeyed cerate, or with sagzenea, and compress it lightly until the blood is fully out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, now release that one and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood a second time and there is no excuse to avoid it, then bleed at that spot or on another vein in the other arm.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "the cord of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the fusca or basilica veins when they are not available or hidden, as it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient should immerse his hand in warm water until it becomes red and the vein appears prominently.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	About this stricture in the middle of that membrane, approach the phlebotomy transversely at the small crosswise part; neither laterally nor longitudinally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	Make the incision wide and perform your phlebotomy on that which you phlebotomize above the joint of the hand at a small distance.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is restricted, now move the hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your goal.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the days of summer, now you are exempt from moving the hand in hot water, and similarly pause the flow of blood in hot water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, for there are no pulsating veins or nerves nearby.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the right forearm vein is beneficial for diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of this phlebotomy is that you hold the hand tightly by the membrane or with your hand, after placing it in hot water, until the vein becomes swollen and clearly visible to the eye; then perform the phlebotomy transversely; and if you incise it not completely, do not proceed further.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And be careful not to leave your hand on the phlebotomy site, for there are nerves among the aforementioned areas stripped of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And now move the hand in hot water and let the blood flow into it, for if you do not move it in hot water, the blood will coagulate at the venous opening, restricting its flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when you have extracted the blood in the required amount, pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it does not heal too quickly; and similarly, this should be done for all kinds of wounds.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The benefit of phlebotomy from the vein on my left hand is that it helps with diseases related to the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do likewise in the phlebotomy on this side as you have done on the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of the phlebotomy from the sephena vein is for diseases located in the lower part of the body, such as kidney diseases, and for retention of menstruation, and for diseases of the legs and ulcers of old wounds, and similar conditions.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the phlebotomy from this vein is that the patient immerses his foot in hot water and performs friction until the veins become visible; then place a bandage around the ankle; the location of the vein is on the back of the heel, and it branches out into the front part of the foot with many branches.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore, phlebotomize the largest branch below the wound behind the heel, for it is better and more effective.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform phlebotomy on the front part of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are below it on the front part of the foot, and place your incision across, as if you were cutting it transversely.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the phlebotomy be gentle.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	If bleeding is prohibited, then place the foot in hot water and let the blood flow out until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist errs on the first attempt, then proceed with another phlebotomy shortly after, since the location is suitable; and do not fear causing harm, but be cautious of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly, do the same for the vein on the other foot.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, the location, as we have said, is below the heel at the junction of the sole.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the time for phlebotomy is best when it is due, particularly in cases where bloodletting is necessary to treat excess blood.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient enters a bath, and quickly and tightly binds the arm from above the elbow to the fingertips with a thin strip of cloth about four fingers wide, so that it appears only in this manner.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then perform the phlebotomy on that vein as much as is possible for you and according to its course; or incise that vein by incision or cut it by cutting, since the location is suitable.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is often somewhat hidden in many people; and if you find that one does not appear clearly to the touch, then perform phlebotomy on some branch of it, which appears between the toe corresponding to the ring finger and the little finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be cautious of the nerves, and let the amount of blood flow that you desire.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then disengage the constriction and place over the site of the phlebotomy a plaster and strengthen the site, for gradually it will heal.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of wind instruments and of the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Wind instruments are usually made of horns, or of ivory, or of wood.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And phlebotomy is done in two ways: one involves incision and extraction of blood, and the other is phlebotomy without incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this phlebotomy that is without incision is done in two ways, as it can be with heat or without heat.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And for the wind instruments that are administered with incision and extraction of blood, there are fourteen locations on the body. Of these, one is placed at the occipital region, which is the back part of the head; another is located in the middle of both sides of the neck; wind instruments are also placed under the chin below the jaw near the mouth; wind instruments of the two cheeks; wind instruments of the alar wings, which are at the end of the nostrils; wind instruments of the two temples; and wind instruments of the two wrists and the two ankles.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And phlebotomy without incision extracts blood only from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and through this method, one does not capture the vital essence as is done with regular phlebotomy; nor is it necessary for phlebotomy to be performed with heat or without heat in any disease caused by internal congestion until the entire body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity compels phlebotomy due to illness or for maintenance, administer it at any time at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, in the middle of the month, and at some times during it.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that among men in whom blood multiplies within due to extraction of air by flatulence and finds weight and thickness in their head; and from those, one finds fullness and hardness in their face and head, and neck; and from those, one finds dryness in their face and forehead, and darkness and dullness in their eyes; and from those who emit the place of their flatulence; and from those whose laughter is multiplied; and from those who taste blood in their mouth, or whose tongue is obstructed and spits blood; and from those whose sleep is multiplied, and those who see blood in their sleep hardness and old age and plagues and other similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when you encounter any of those causes, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, I command that flatulence be performed after two or three more hours have passed since noon.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the benefit of flatulence from the neck is that when it counteracts gravity in the head and to what has sunk into the eyes; but it should be done near complete evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this flatulence is in the location of the phlebotomy of the cephalic region.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not advisable to use it on one who is completely fatigued, or in one who has a cold, for it can cause great harm to them.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason, it is not advisable to use it on the elderly, and those whose heads are frequently ill.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But for one who continues to experience forgetfulness due to it; and for this reason, you should command the practitioner to pause their hand a little while after applying the cupping vessel to various parts, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Here is the translation:
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And when it is slightly compressed the windpipe, for if it is placed below, it produces weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the upward windiness causes headaches and accidents in the head, and ophthalmia, and paralysis, and prenasal congestion, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is in place of bloodletting from the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And you should command the windworker not to press his hand for scarification so that he does not incise the artery and cause a flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And windiness below the chin causes alcohol in the mouth and corruption of the gums, and resembles the symptoms of illnesses that are in the mouth, and is in place of bloodletting from the aliheric which is between the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But the windiness that is performed on the two temples causes cephalalgia, which is caused by an excess of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the windiness of both parts inside the temples causes efficacy equivalent to bloodletting from three veins, which are the basilica, fusca, and cephalic, for it attracts the blood from all those veins that are larger in the flesh, and from the smaller veins within the larger veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the windworker not to proceed too far in scarification, for the area is bare of flesh and below lies the nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a windiness with which one winds over the buttocks and causes hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers below.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	You should order the surgeon to make a large incision, and it should be of even depth, for the place requires strong drying; and let thin superficial cuts be made with the lancet.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Small incisions in the groin should be made very carefully, for they draw blood from the whole body, and relieve old pains of the heart and of the mother, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and alleviate bothor and ademil; and they serve instead of phlebotomy at sophena’s two sites, and alahorcoben, and at two nails.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, they weaken the whole body and cause syncope in some men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And for the incisions at alahorcoben, the judgment about their appropriateness is similar to the judgment regarding incisions in two groins.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the incisions is that you place the incision at its beginning and then gradually continue it according to a timely suction, and do not prolong the position of the incisions, but pause them briefly, and remove them gently, so that the humors come to the site by equal occurrence.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place already turning red and swelling, and until the vigor of the blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Now you should make incisions and repeat the suction gradually, and appropriately consider the condition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For the man who has tender flesh with few pores, you should scarify him once and not more, so that the place does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And he commands the assistant to enlarge the incision slightly and to empty the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thick, now you should scarify twice, for on the first occasion the way of absorption for the blood and the moisture is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But on the second occasion, to the acquired inspection of extracting the thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is muddy, now the third scarification should be performed so that it achieves the desired effect.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or in small amounts, one scarification is sufficient for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we perform multiple scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, now it is necessary to scarify more extensively.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scarification refers to the depth of the incision alone.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the skin of the person where the incision is to be made is thick, hard, dark, and the pores are narrow, it is necessary to anoint the areas for cupping with soothing, opening, and resolving oils; if it is in summer, such as aloes oil or violet oil, or olive oil from violets, or chamomile oil; and if it is in winter, then narcissus oil, lily oil, camomilla oil, or similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick and viscous, then the oil should be marigold oil, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or anise oil, or similar.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the wound is from broad pores of tender flesh, it must be prohibited from oil, and should have applied to it the places of wounds near ventilation washed with fresh water or warm water infused with solatrum, or water of couchgrass, or water of borage, and similar things.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for the one whose blood is of thick humidity, wash his wounds with vinegar water, or water of myrtle and sumach and similar things.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for the one whose superfluities are thick, wash his wounds with old vinegar, or water of savory, which is marjoram, or of dill decoction, or chamomile, and similar things.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it must be guarded from bathing; after which it should be administered immediately following the bath for an hour or two, and it is good for it to rest near the wound.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is needed to be done to regulate the patient after wound treatment or bloodletting before applying dressings to the wound.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	At the beginning, consider this: if the wound or the one who needs to be bled is choleric and there is inflammation and heat over the blood, then it must be treated with cooling causes such as sour grapes, endive in vinegar water, lettuce, sage, julep, and similar things.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And give them foods such as poultry, and meat of suitable birds, and foods seasoned with vinegar, and similar things.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for the one whose complexion is warm, it must be that they drink rose syrup, or syrup of hot sage seeds with sumac, and sweet-smelling water midway between sunrise and noon; and it should be recommended to them to use little drinking and eating, and give them foods of poultry and rabbit and small birds and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	Let it be known on the day of bleeding and phlebotomy that drinking should be more than eating.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	It should be given to drink at certain hours to some men theriac alpharac or medicine of musk, which is nutmeg, or alcelita before bleeding or phlebotomy or nearby, so that the principal members are comforted and that the blood be refined; and it is not necessary for them to take that hot mixture.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	However, let the bleedings that require incision be performed cautiously over the groin area, and on the thigh and ankle, and around the navel, in the places where the ribs are, and at the pit of the armpit, because these members cannot tolerate incisions.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not intended for those areas except to draw blood from a member, just as we place a cup over the breast in a disease of blood flowing from the nose; and we use that method to dissolve coagulated blood in the member, just as we place it on the abdomen and the navel; because that thins the member and heats it and alleviates pain by resolving the coagulation.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it should be applied to the nostrils when they are blocked or diseased, because by the power of attraction it easily removes obstructions and eradicates disease from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, it does the same when applied to the groin and thigh due to bloodletting in those areas where it is confined.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these bleedings should be administered only after suction has taken place; and some should be applied with heat.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some should be applied full of warm water in diseases affecting the thigh.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	With this you are to fill the blister and make it larger, either use warm water alone or water in which herbs appropriate for this purpose have been boiled.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Method of administering a blister with fire: the width of the opening should be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of fluid should be half a palm; and it should be placed in the middle part, at the location which is around it, halfway there; the tube should be small according to the amount that fits into it, like a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made of soft leather or citrus peel, with thick edges, lion's skin, flax, and smooth so that it does not hurt the limb due to its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And there should be a horizontal stick of wood or iron in the middle, on which a candle is placed for light.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this blister should be larger than the one we have recommended; and the smaller one is used according to the illnesses and the condition of the person using it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the blisters for children and those who are weak should be smaller than the blisters for young and strong people.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this blister over fire on a limb is to extend the flesh towards the fire properly in front of a small candle made of wax, and place it in the middle of the horizontal stick at the right location for the blister so that the heat is applied below but does not burn the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And it should be placed properly on the patient's limb, and the finger should be on the tube that we mentioned, so that when we have the blisters and do not want to keep the finger there and allow the vapor to escape through that tube, the blister will dissolve quickly.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	Regarding fire injuries in the manner of medicine, and repeat that if you should need it.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Make a ventouse that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse rib or obstacle, and it is not applied except when filled with water, and place it on the limb only briefly.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And the larger this ventouse is, the better, because it can receive a greater quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter xcviij.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Lancets are not administered to all members but only to those members where the placement of ventouses is not possible due to their small size, such as the gums and palate and similar areas; or on parts bare of flesh, such as the fingers and nose and similar areas.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found, namely water leeches, should be from clear and clean stagnant waters.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then leave them in stagnant water day and night until they are hungry, so that there remains no cause in their belly; and then evacuate the body at the beginning of phlebotomy and ventouse application; and then rub the diseased limb until it reddens; and then place them on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and satisfied.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suction the area with a ventouse, it is better for relief.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the area with warm water and subsequently with clean water; and it should be rubbed and pressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the blood is prolonged along the course near the attachment of the veins, and if it oozes out, then you should press a cloth upon it that has been dipped in cold water, and place that on top until the oozing stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is multiplied, then powder and sprinkle over it vitriol trisected, or alum and similar substances that cause constipation, until the bleeding stops; or place over the area masticated fava beans, and leave them there until the beans adhere to the spot, at which point the bleeding will stop.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if it is necessary to apply the procedure of bloodletting again, do so when it is possible to change those veins.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the veins are prohibited from suspension, then the area should be rubbed with fresh blood or leave a needle in the spots until bleeding occurs; and afterwards place them there, for those who feel any blood will soon adhere.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to clot, sprinkle over them a little aloes powder, or salt, or ash, and they will clot immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the chapter of the third part: on restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is deemed necessary in the art of medicine; it is about the restoration of fractures and dislocations of bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Or, my son, know that those who boast of this chapter are foolish doctors and the vulgar, and those who for any length of time have not regarded the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, it is done that this method of the scientists in our land is private; and I have not forgotten any of this for any length of time; nor have I adopted what follows except through the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying to understand them, from which I extracted the science.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And thus I directed my efforts toward experimenting and studying throughout the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and upon which I have experimented; for I have abridged it for you and delivered it from the occupation of lengthiness; and I have abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation; and I have shown it at the end of clarification; and formed therein various forms of the instruments used, as is done by addition of explanation, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	An overview and collection from the treatment of fractures of bones, including those whose preliminary steps are necessary before we begin to recall the details of each type of fracture and their various treatments.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the speech; and the chapters to which understanding is necessary at the beginning for the practitioner to stand on the truth of those; so that you and others who know or will learn this noble art may understand.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when it happens to someone to suffer a fracture, dislocation, torsion, or fall, at that moment you should consider at the beginning whether to perform bloodletting or to treat them otherwise, along with whatever else is appropriate, unless some cause prohibits it, such as weakness of strength, or if it affects an infant, or an elderly person in decrepitude, or during times of extreme heat or cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And accordingly, be content with food that is light, such as fresh herbs and the meat of birds and small animals; and avoid heavy meats and foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are sure of a safe recovery from inflammation, and if you do not fear an effusion of matter into the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	Then return the patient to their usual regimen when they are accustomed to it.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the broken bone begins to be restored, it is then necessary for the patient to be fed nutritious foods that are moist and heavy, such as those made from wheat boiled with water, rice, peas, beef tripe, eggs, fresh meat, and similar items. And with this regimen, coagulation of the fracture occurs more easily and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that bones fractured in humans during the first fever and in the elderly cannot be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the drying of the limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are continued and consolidated according to their nature for a long time by the drying of those members, and those that continue and consolidate do so at the end of the inflammation, just like the bones of young children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature adjusts and applies them around the broken bone from all parts without any cause similar to glue, in which there is a thickness that adheres and strengthens it as they conjoin and unite, until they reach their full strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, without any cause hindering them from performing their works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to withhold from the patient foods that are heavy and viscous and thick, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The treatment varies for fractures according to the diversity of the member. 
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the thigh is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the arm; and similarly all the other members are different among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And you will find a description of every type of fracture, expanded in its own separate chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Note the diversity of fractures within themselves.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the types of bone fractures are diverse within themselves; for one kind of arch-shaped fracture is different from those that occur in the stars; and some fractures are according to the length of the bone: so the fractures of the shaft, splinters, and open and closed fractures proceed as when a pen is prepared for writing, and there is a fracture due to a blow and disruption in the head, and there is a small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And each type has its own proper treatment in the restoration of it, as there will be a separate description of them in their respective places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Note the signs of a bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this a bone fracture is known: its twisting, and the prominence and appearance of it to the touch, and how it feels when you press on it.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, when there is no apparent twisting in the place or sound, and when you touch the bone with movement and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	However, it is possible that there may be twisting or a small fissure; therefore, you should not press on it with your hand and compress it entirely. Instead, pause and apply the medicines of which there will be a reminder soon at the moment when it is appropriate to do so; and note that it might be tight due to subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that when the place is arched and not split into two or another part with it without being affected by swelling, as it remains whole from its beginning, then you should begin from your time to correct the swelling that affects the abscess.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess affects it, then leave that for some days until the abscess subsides; and afterward bandage that according to each method you can by lightness and ease.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration of it and adjustment of it is easier than that of the bone in which swelling occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen that according to what will come to mind regarding it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if swelling occurs in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from both parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And place yourself in such a position that you can put the limb down bound according to its natural figure, while the parts of the broken member are extended, then it forces you to return those addictions with ease and according to each way you can back to their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful according to your strength that no harm comes to the patient due to your operation or injury; and strive according to your ability that you apply one bone to its companion bone according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is necessary that at that opportune moment you touch with your hand that which needs attention, and if you see any different cause, correct that and bind it according to the extent of your skill.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And from an incorrect extension and compression, so do false doctors with their foolish manipulations cause an abscess to occur by their operation, or they cause a contraction in the limb as we have seen this happen through their foolish manipulations.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And near to the joint, near the equalization and proper operation and constriction of that limb, rest and tranquility; warn the patient about this and make them avoid harming it during their waking hours and while they sleep, and observe its revolution and agitation, and know its evacuation, and know all of its movements with all of its strength; and wait until the position of the limb is in a state where pain is assured, which causes pain or injury when in an improper position. Then change it to another position in which there is no pain; and take care that this position be straight and equal so that curvature does not occur when restoring the limb.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the constriction of the tranquil limb is what I recommend; for you to know that broken limbs vary in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small like the arm and the finger and the wrist and similar to these, then the wrapping should be of fine soft cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But for those that are large like the thigh or the chest, it is necessary to wrap them with linen and hard material, because the wrapping of linen connects the large limb and strengthens it uniformly in constriction, ensuring that no dirt enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And after beginning, after your equalization evacuation, pause appropriately for this, on the site of that fracture with three wraps or four depending on the limb; and tighten it gently with the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And apply it to the part where the main pus comes from the place of the fracture, and tighten it so much that you do not loosen the compression with which you have tightened the place of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And apply an extension to the wrapping of the fracture site slightly, and loosen the compression little by little until you have removed a large part of it.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap the fractured site again with it, and then apply to the lower pus part of the wrapping; and your procedure should be in the compression of the wrapping and the loosening of it as we have said about the first upper wrapping.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then pause between the wrappings with a piece of linen or cloth on which the curvature of the fracture is modeled, if there is any curvature; and if not, do not place anything in it for this reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place over the other bandage, and then apply plasters properly made right away if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area, and at that time place over what causes the abscess and reduces the inflammation; and leave this for several days; and then you tighten over it the bandages.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the plasters be about half a cubit wide and well made wisely; or let them be of fir wood; or of palm leaves; and let the width of each plaster be according to this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the plaster that is placed over the fracture should be slightly thicker and wider than the others, and the length of the plaster should match the size of the limb; then wrap over the plasters with another bandage according to your initial compression; and then bind it above with fine linen as we have said about compression, and this should be your compression according to the location of the fracture, and the further away from the fracture, the less should be the compression.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And let the threads be moderate in thickness and fineness, and let them be of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen some foolish people use ropes made from twisted fibers for their threads, this is a great error, when one sees the stitches uneven.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And likewise, fine threads are not suitable, for you will not achieve with stitches what you desire; and it is necessary that there be more than a finger's width between stitch and stitch.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is in pain at the ends of the bones near the stitches in those places, then pause and use bandages made of lion's wool or crimson wool until it does not cause injury to them.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes a fracture is caused by a blow, and there occurs a disruption in the collarbone, and I found this in my memory as described in the second chapter specifically.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that all broken limbs are not set with splints on the first day; the reason for this is that when the limb is large, it should not be placed on splints immediately but after about five or seven days, or more, according to your certainty of the occurrence of pus.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of plasters with which the Ancients used to treat, which were applied over fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of making a plaster for the rapid healing of fractures, suitable for various conditions and particularly for women and children, as it does not produce heat or irritation: take powdered flour, which is the fine residue that sticks to the walls of the mill during grinding.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And confine it as it is, but sieve it through white cloth, and stop the compounding of it not thin nor subtle; and then use it.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method for plasters to treat fractures, dislocations, and twists: recipe of asafetida, lead oxide, acacia, hellebore, and migrauch, which is the rind of wild millet, of each drachm x; of myrrh and aloes each drachm v; aychil drachm xx; all are trisected and sieved and mixed with water or with white cloth if the composition is heated; and then use this plaster, for it is well composed and quickly restores broken bones, and confers health on many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method for a plaster to treat fractures and twists: recipe of migrauch and the bark of white mulberry each drachm x; of myrrh and aloes each drachm v; of acacia drachm vi; of Armenian bole drachm xx.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All should be triturated in a mortar with a pounding tool, and they should be sieved, and they should be compounded with water or white cloth if the mixture is heated, and it should be administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method for a plaster for joints and bones separated from their places, and for accidental pain in those areas and for fissures and fractures: take clean wool and immerse it in sour wine and hot oil and apply it to the location.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	Note that this plaster is not effective for restoration, for abscesses, and does not properly alleviate pain.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method for a plaster that restores a broken bone: take fresh mulberry leaves and wild poppy leaves; mix them together and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of preparing a quick plaster to administer for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of the remnant of abscess: take rue leaves, chamomile flowers, violets, and flour of spelt, each one part; mix all together and boil in wine, if the limb is not inflamed.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is inflamed, now mix that with coriander water or with water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of making a stronger plaster for resolution than the first one, when there is a hard abscess during the restoration of the limb: take rue leaves and linseed seeds, pomegranate flowers, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, each one part equally; mix all together and boil in sage water or in sweet water or in wine, whichever suits the condition of the limb and according to its repose as indicated by its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	However, Hippocrates does not write in his book that it should be paused on the broken limb during its restoration except for wax made of beeswax and oil, and nothing else; he recommends that it should be midway between coarseness and fineness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	However, Galen is seen to have placed them on the broken limb during its restoration and for causes in which there is slight drying with heat as well as substances like myrrh and onion, similar to those causes that we have recounted.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of preparing a plaster to apply for injury and pain: take egg whites, chickpeas, human hair cut or bird feathers, rue, and salt, each in equal parts; mix all together and sieve them and boil, then make into a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The quantity according to which it is necessary that the bandage remain on and should then be removed is such that you consider whether there is no pain or swelling or if the bone is not displaced from its place; therefore, do not remove it for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is severe pain or swelling or inflammation in the area, then you should be cautious or remove that bandage at once, and remove the plaster as well.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a piece of linen and a sponge soaked in seawater, and immerse it in warm water, then use that to wash the area until the swelling subsides and the pain is alleviated; afterwards let the limb rest for an hour; then bandage it with soft wool soaked in vinegar and oil or rose oil, and keep it wrapped overnight until you are sure there is no abscess forming, and until the swelling of the limb has subsided and the pain has been reduced.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards, repeatedly apply a gentle bandage and small plaster without making it as tight as your first binding, and gently do this until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you find that the abscess, the hardness, the pain, and the swelling have all subsided completely, and you need a plaster and bandage, then repeat this as you did at the beginning, similarly.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no cause occurs to the limb of those we have mentioned, then do not remove it but wait three days or four or ten or seven; and in some cases all of this is left for twenty days as you see fit when removing the bandage, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and the flesh around it coagulates.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	At this point adjust the ligature more than in your first stricture entirely, and adjust according to the swelling of the patient's flesh, as is preceded by the recollection of it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	But if you see the site of the fracture already drying and wasting more than is necessary, then you will know that nutrition cannot reach it; and therefore apply to it moist sponges as often as possible; and do this for three days; and slightly loosen the ligature, and by this operation direct nourishment to the limb, and it will be quickly healed.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But what those foolish restorers of the fractured limb do otherwise when it is not restored at the beginning as necessary and is restored according to its curvature, is an error in their operation and great fear, and if they were judges, this would be enlarged upon by the Ancients in their books and criticized accordingly.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do this, which is why it is more reasonable that they should not do so.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter Second: On fractures when they occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a hard object, and the impact dislodges all the bone inward toward the brain, which is behind the bone, just as it would in wood; therefore, this type is called an indentation. Or the object may cut some part of the bone and cut through the flesh but does not penetrate to the backside of it; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the severity of these two fractures can be either great or slight, and there is also a fracture called comminuted or crushed; the cause of this is an impact with something weak or falling onto a stone, and similar circumstances.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating that approaches the panniculus, which is below the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the danger of these two fractures is great or little.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of the fracture that is weakened in the bone, in the subtlety of the small threads, and for this it is named this particular kind of fracture capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is made either by falling or by the impact of a stone and similar things, which causes some lamina of bone to enter into the soft parts inside, and it occurs in the concave place just as it happens with bones when they suffer an impact and break upon entering the soft parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this happens more often in the bones of human bodies, just as it does with children's skulls.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And for all these kinds of fractures, treatments are applied, which are pieces just like small stars separated.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will return to the recapitulation of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And you should recognize all these kinds of fractures by detection on them and by inquiry into their attempts and the state of the flesh that is corrupted over them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary kind is recognized by this: it appears on the bone, and when it is cleaned, it shows as a line on the bone because the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	But in the treatment of fractures, consider at the beginning the symptoms of the patient, and if you see from these symptoms that they signify by clear indication extreme fear, such as vomiting like bile, extension, loss of understanding, hoarseness, fainting, acute fever, and similar symptoms with their severity, doubt whether the patient will be healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if for uncommon accidents you hope for a cure, then you begin the treatment of them.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	Which cause is four if it has come to you the illness at the beginning as it is an illness and this is in the days of winter, then it is necessary that you study in the condition of the bone before the day fourteen according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then it is necessary that you wait to remove the bone before the seventh day, knowing that what is around the bone may become corrupted by inflammation, and that accidents which we have recounted may occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the membrane covering the brain and is in small pieces and adhered, then it is necessary that you incise the fragmented and adhered part as I shall recount to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you shave the head of the sick person, and expose the bone according to custom and method as best you can according to the shape of the injury, so that it is clear on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you that you need to detect the bone, or there is bleeding or an abscess requiring cautery, then you must proceed with what is necessary, and it is that you apply the area with cloths infused in wine and olive oil, and allow the wound to rest until the abscess is subdued, and you are sure of no further bleeding; then begin the circular incision around the bone and its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one method is that you incise the bone with an incisor of narrow shape, and this is the form of it: And then apply another incisor to it, slightly wider than the previous one; and this is the form of it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	Then apply the lancet to cut out the pus that remains.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is necessary that you have various lancets, some of which are used for cutting out pus deeper than others; and some are sharper at their tips than the rest, and they are made of iron or leather.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in tapping on the lancets so that you do not injure the head and skin of the patient.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary to perforate around it before you apply the lancets, which are called shallow forceps.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are called this because these do not reach the depth of the bone beneath them. For the forceps have a rounded tip or margin above that which is near the head, similar to a small border or circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is convenient that you have many of these forceps, each of which should suit the sharpness of different bones. Ensure that at hand for every part of the brain, the tip of which is sharp, and the quantity in length and breadth is according to the size and sharpness of this bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the method for three types of forceps: The quality of perforating around the broken bone is that you place the forceps on the bone and rotate them with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the forceps to another location, doing this throughout the extent equal to its thickness or thereabouts.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Here is the translation:
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And see that you keep such carefulness that the incisor does not touch any part of the thigh.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And thus when you have circled the bone to perforate it, and it is separated from the thigh if it is continuous with it, and you will extract that, see that you rasp and equalize that in the roughness of it with something that is in the bone, but however see that it is more thin and finer than other incisors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any part of the small and delicate bones remains, now take that with ease with what is suitable to you among the instruments; and then treat the wound with lint and dressings as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is light, distant from fear, which Guy of Chauliac and many great authors praise; and this is the speech about it: It is necessary for you at the beginning to start uncovering the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most severe and obvious, until when you have uncovered that part and you have paused below it with the tip of this slow and cheerful incisor, which has this form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the lens-shaped part remains intact and does not cut any area, while the sharp part divides into two sides along its length, as you see; that the lens-shaped part be fitted to the thigh with the sharp face of it against the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then strike upon the incisor of one part with a small hammer until you cut all the bone with ease as it is revolved, and be sure about the soft tissue that no accident happens in any way, and even if the surgeon were the most inexperienced of all men and the least knowledgeable among them; certainly, and even if he were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If there is any reason to cut into the tissue beneath the skin in certain bone locations, insert the pointed part of the knife-like instrument and deliver it where it is easy to do so, for it should be done without harm or fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the tissue beneath the skin, and what is abraded or remains of the bone is its surface, and it lies in roughness and small protrusions, then you should scrape that roughness and eradicate those protrusions with fine razors which you have prepared in various quantities so that you can administer them appropriately at any location during your operation on the broken bone and according to its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you should administer at your ratio with which you scrape the bone at the beginning with the broader of those razors, and gradually use one finer than the other, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the thinnest and finest of all of them.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But in each of the other small and delicate fractures and subtle fractures, you should administer care according to what is needed for the correction of them.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is because they are not afraid about all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And stand on what we have written regarding major fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the tissue beneath the skin is intact when you remove the bone, then take a piece of cloth according to the size of the wound, and dip it in warm oil, and place that on the wound opening; and then take another folded or triple-layered cloth and dip it in wine and warm oil, and place that on the first cloth; do this as gently as possible so as not to injure the tissue around the wound. Then apply a broad bandage over it, but not too tightly, just enough to cover the wound.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	If you are certain that this condition requires treatment in one day or two before you are sure of an abscess being cauterized; and then untie that and immediately administer medicines which counter excessive dryness, such as lint boiled in water and flour of wheat, and powder of endive and arishta, and similar to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you should make of these medicines powder which is finely ground over the wound, as they are dry; and generally, administer to it all medicine whose property is to cleanse without irritating.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be careful according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment is clean; and let it not become infected or inflamed; nor allow it to increase in virulence. For when it is placed over the panniculus cerebri, it corrupts that part and weakens it, and you will bring upon the patient that malignant malice.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it affects the brain, as when the bone is penetrated and especially when the treatment of it is compressed, and there is blackness on its surface; and therefore consider these signs if you see in the patient the accidents we have mentioned, know that it is dangerous without any doubt.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if the blackness does not come from the medicine placed above it but is due to the nature of that medicine, then take one part honey and three parts olive oil, and soak a piece of cloth in this mixture, and place it over the wound; and subsequently treat it with the spices suitable for healing until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is cut.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken except in two main places, or sometimes one of those lesser areas, because there you have two bones, since the lower part is cartilaginous, and it is not broken, but only contusion and swelling and bruising occurs there.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two main parts is broken, then you should insert your finger into the side of the nose, and equalize that fracture with your index finger inside and your thumb outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this with ease, and be careful that your operation does not cause pain to the patient.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then you should equalize it at the end of a smooth rod which is small in diameter.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should proceed as described.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And when you restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and otherwise, then around the seventh or tenth day, you should rest from cauterizing the abscess.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert into the end of the nose a piece of linen cloth if the fracture is in one part, or place two bandages if the fracture is in two parts, and let the bandage be thick enough to fill the hollow of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient restorers say that the bandages should be soaked in butter, and changed every day, but I have not seen this; instead, let the cloth be soaked in egg white mixed with powdered flour; then leave it on until the bone is firm and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	In some cases, place a poultice on the nose instead of cauterization, as it is wrapped in cloth from a lion; and if the fracture of the nose is too severe and the patient is prohibited from inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, do cauterizations.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another poultice is applied after cauterization, apply a plaster to the nose with pitch or with wax infused in vinegar and rose oil, or with cerate.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if no poultice is applied after cauterization, now you should apply plasters to that with sesame flour and powdered coriander seeds mixed with egg white; and then place it over the lion's paw, and do not put anything on the nose.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or comminuted, now you should cut around them, and extract them with instruments as is appropriate; and then close the fissure, and treat it with what promotes healing and consolidation, and with plasters suitable for that.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there is swelling inside the nose, now you should treat it with cauterization and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the lower jaw is broken and there is no swelling around it, now check if the fracture is only on the surface and not split into two parts and curved inward, then its diagnosis is easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	If the fracture is on the right side, place your left thumb in the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left side, use your right thumb; then push the bone fragments back into their proper position with ease using your other hand from the outer part; proceed gently but effectively.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then you should apply extension to both parts as much as possible to achieve proper alignment.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a concussion of the teeth or disruption, then strengthen those that you expect will break with thread of gold or silver or silk; and immediately apply cerate to the fractured jaw, and then place it on doubled cloth, and place over it a large piece of linen properly made, or a pad of wax equal in length to the jaw; and then bind it above as is appropriate for your bandaging method and as you find convenient, so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and give him food in the form of thin soups.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you find that the figure is already altered in any way, then you should change and loosen it on the third day; and then correct what has been altered of it and plaster it with powder of linseed, egg white, or flour of chickpeas, after you have removed the cerate from it, and place over the plaster thin wool.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then, as it is now attached and adjusted the plaster over it, and if the position of the bone is not altered, leave it, do not loosen it until it is healed and the fracture is strong; for usually this fracture becomes strong in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another abscess occurs that needs to be cauterized, then administer what we have said about similar cases in the section on reducing inflammation, and remove that abscess.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is a splinter, then consider whether the bone fragment is separated or displaced. At this point, use your skill to remove those fragments with what is appropriate for you in their removal with the instruments available.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the splinter is narrow, then enlarge it with a scalpel as much as your need requires.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have removed those fragments, and if they cannot be completely extracted, then close the opening of the splinter if it is wide; otherwise, apply one of the plasters that are appropriate for this condition to promote healing until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the collarbone when it is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	There are various ways the collarbone can be fractured in front of the muscle, and this fracture occurs in one of three manners.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	For it may be broken, or separated, or separated into two parts without any splinters being involved, and this is easier for its restoration; or it may involve splinters, making its restoration difficult; or the fracture may be accompanied by a splinter.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the procedure in such a case, when the fracture is accompanied by a splinter, is that you have two assistants present: one to support and guide the broken collarbone, and the other to extend the neck toward that area.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	In adjusting the fracture align the bones so that it takes on the form most appropriate to what is necessary, and do not leave any prominence or depression.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, now it is necessary to place under the armpit of the injured side a ball made of cloth or wool, and let its size be according to the quantity needed; extend and elevate the shoulder and compress the ball with your hand so that you align the fracture as required.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the shoulder extremity outwards towards the side, so that it reaches the proper position, now it is necessary for the injured person to lie supine on their neck, and place something under the muscle of one side, about midway in size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant presses the muscle of it towards the rear until the bone of the shoulder is elevated to its proper position, and then you correct the fracture and align it with the bones as described.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel hard knots of the shoulder and pain, now it is necessary to incise over those areas and extract those knots with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is stuck in the bone, now you must devise an incision with one of the instruments that you have prepared for this purpose, since you have placed under the shoulder the tool used by the surgeon; and this tool is made of wood or iron and has the following form:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a bowl whose interior is concave; and its width should be according to what you need from it, depending on the size of the bone or its smallness.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	Make the length of the instrument as long as is possible for the operation; let it have two ends just as you please, and one end be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound which you have incised when you extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and you are sure it will form an abscess, then you should now approximate the two lips of the wound with a suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear it will form an abscess soon, then you should employ the wound with dressings and powders according to the quantity of the wound's disruption.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess forms soon, then apply a dressing with vinegar and rose oil, and place it over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the traction of the bone when it is with the wound and its section, place a plaster made of flour from bran mixed with egg white, and put it over the head of the bone, and then place the ball under the navel if you desire that one, and then take soft material, which the Saracens call tow, let it be as long as your hand and its width about an palm or around that; and then place double powder on the head of the bone and the plaster; and then take a thin board strip whose width is three fingers and in length similarly; and then wrap that with cloth, and then wrap that cloth around the board strip at the site above the site of the fracture; and then apply soft material as it revolves, and roll it over the neck of it and under the navel of it and under the navel of the patient, and reduce it to all parts, and when you see that the traction of the fracture with descending traction is right, and this is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And thus, do not let the splint rest on the broken bone; and therefore it is necessary that you see the patient every day, so when the bandage has loosened or you see the splint already moved, then you must correct this and tighten the bandaging.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And place the patient's pillow on their neck, and place underneath it a small roll to raise the head during sleep; therefore, in this way, the support of the chest will be raised from that side, and thus the fracture of the collarbone is elevated according to the muscle; or tie the arm to the neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the bandage unless you find an abscess in the area within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then change the plaster if you see the face of it like that, and adjust it in the constriction and restore it until it is set and the collarbone fracture is healed.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the method in twenty-eight days, and in some cases in less time for some people.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The scapula is broken in the middle and not fractured at the edges but only the margins.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when it is broken at that location — and it is broken in the middle part of it — and this is known only by palpation, then according to the shape of the fracture prepare yourself and reduce it according to its natural figure in every way you can manage.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And place over it powdered alum of hauv and lion's fat; and next place cotton wool doubled; and then place upon the lint cloth, fine powder according to the quantity of the spoon all or at most a little.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	And if the lint cloth is concave in some parts of the spoon, then you fill that concavity with lion's fat, and then press the lint cloth according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then wrap it above with linen strips with appropriate compression and fix the lint cloth in place so that it does not move from its position.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And examine the bandaging each day; and whenever it needs to be softened, change it and wrap it again, and adjust the lint cloth if it has moved from its position.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And place the dressing on its side as appropriate.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spoon is restored in xx days or in .xxv. 
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when the number is complete, then you undo the bandage, and you know for certain that this is of the bones of which the beginning was not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the place of the bone piece and place the bandage below it, then you cut above it, remove it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the collarbone for the pus formation or cauterization if this occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of a foot fracture.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot sometimes is broken in the middle and remains there; but the extremities move, which causes cicatrisation and comminution.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the accidents of it when the middle of it is broken is that it inclines to the internal parts and there occurs great pain, and difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and heavy bleeding; and it is declared in the cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies supine on their back, and a bolster is placed between their shoulders; and gently press the muscles of it, and adjust the ribs by more than two ribs, and carefully do the operation and equalization in every possible way and suitable for this, until the figure of the bone returns as needed.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place on it a plaster and cotton, and lay over fine sticks of willow or hazel or similar in lightness, after which you wrap that in cloth; and then gently bind that over the broken bone so that it is not too tight; and proceed with bandaging according to the roundness of the back several times, and tighten that moderately; and then consider the bandage at all times, and when it has loosened, tighten that again.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity compels the removal of that which has been bound by corrosion or pus or an abscess that has occurred in the area, then you should cut and untie it and remove the plaster and correct what has happened according to this method of treatment; and immediately replace the plaster if you have done it to the face; and adjust the bandaging until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in thick parts where they join; and at their extremities in front, such contusion does not happen to them because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the feeling of those who examine it with the said methods.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that it aligns the fracture with the said methods in the possible manner, until it is set as needed, and then apply plaster and bind the broken bone with a splint if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs inclines towards the inner parts, then severe and piercing pain occurs, like the pain that happens to one who has pleurisy, and because the bone punctures the membrane; and difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood occur; and this is difficult to treat.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the Ancients were skilled in that with powerful remedies.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And what they say is: it is necessary to avoid foods that produce inflammation and gas, so that the abdomen does not become swollen and extended, and thus the fracture is pushed outward.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	Let us proceed with that which will not be a cause of generating an abscess by burning, if it does not occur; and if it has already occurred, now aid in that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them say that it is paused above the wound and close to where it is drawn with strength; and this is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the wound may draw the superfluities to the place due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them say: cover the place with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and place powders between the folds until it is full, so that the bandage is applied as if wrapping it according to its roundness; and near it, treat the injury with the treatment for pleurisy using food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the cause of the injury is violent and cannot be endured, and the bone pierces through the membrane with a point, we fear for the injury; now it should be that we cut over the place, uncover the broken edge, and then apply an instrument to secure the stability thereof, the memory of which precedes, and that they saw the bone with ease, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then we adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitching, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs internally, now you should incise it and apply powder in roasted oil on the place, and treat the injury with what is appropriate for an internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And he should lie on the side on which he sleeps until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the second vertebra and the neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	In some cases, there is a fracture of the neck bones, and it takes time for them to heal, similarly with the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, at that moment consider whether their skin is already softened, stunned, deadened, unable to move them or stretch them, and when you press on them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they do not feel pain in them, then you know that they are not recovering, and in such conditions it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you press on them and they feel constriction from the pressure and pain when pricked with a needle, then you know that the vertebra is safe and that the patient will recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if the vertebrae of the neck show signs similar to this and you want to know if they will recover or not, then at that moment consider their breathing.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If you see that they are already weakened and the same thing happens to them as described for the skin, and shortly after lying on their back, they experience vomiting and involuntary diarrhea, and in some cases they lie on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you know it is fatal, and at that point there is no need to work on their treatment.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of those symptoms occur, the cause is better and farther removed from danger.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for them is to apply a poultice to reduce the swelling on the affected vertebra using raw oil or boiled linseed; place this poultice on it several times a day until the swelling subsides.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	During the hours of rest, apply one of the comforting and healing plasters, and stretch over that bandage; and command the patient to use rest and calmness and not to sleep on the side where pain is felt until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that the bone is bruised or has separated for any reason, then you should set it in place and hold that bone; and immediately bring together the two edges of the wound, with stitches if it is large; and then treat it with some flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the tip of the bone is fractured at the end, and it is the joint, then you should insert your finger into the backside, and align the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible by second-degree adjustment; and then apply a plaster and splint to it, if you need those, and then secure it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel bruised and fractured bones there, then act upon that, remove them, and treat the wound with the treatment that is prescribed until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the broad (likely referring to the treatment of wide wounds or injuries).
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the broad areas are often fractured, and when they are fractured, then their fracture is nothing but a communication at the extremities of those bones and they are split along their length and deviated to the sides; and the patient experiences pain in that location and puncture, and the limb is paralyzed when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it until it aligns with the figure of the fracture.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is at the extremity of the limb, then adjust it as seems appropriate to you by equalizing it so that it resembles its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	And if the fracture is in the bone that already inclines downward, then have the patient lie on their stomach so that you can prepare the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have set it properly, apply a plaster over it, and then place a splint of wood or cane beside it, and bind it tightly with bandages so that there is no risk of the fracture being moved or the splint becoming loose.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And set the concavity by filling it so that it takes on an even shape, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	And if an abscess occurs suddenly, then stop the extension and restoration of it until the abscess is brought under control, and apply what is appropriate to sedate the abscess as has been previously described; and then return to restoring it, and bind it as is necessary.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if the bones are displaced or crushed, then you must treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the adjunct bone.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjunct is what lies between the spine and the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is fractured, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which involves taking a piece of wood of medium thickness in this shape:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	Let the ends of two bandages be held, and let it be suspended from a high place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Follow the malalignment on a stool; and then lay the broken arm out over the wood until it reaches the midpoint where the curve of the wood matches the curvature of the arm.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend something heavy from it, so that the patient extends it downward with their hands; and then the physician should place the fracture along with its parts above in such a way that the fracture returns to its proper position.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And another method is that the patient lies supine on their neck and suspend the hand of the neck with bandages; and then instruct two assistants, one to hold what is above the fracture along with its parts, and the other to hold below the patient; and each should extend it in their respective direction.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then pull on the fracture with bandages and on that with another set of bandages, and each of the two assistants should extend in their respective directions.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And therefore, if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then it is necessary to place half of the bandage over the midpoint and the other part below the fracture near the joint.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is close to the joint, then it is necessary to place the bandage over that location and around that joint.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Similarly, do this with ease and effort, and then when it is properly adjusted as needed and applied well, pull on that if an abscess does not occur, using caution.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If an abscess is to be cauterized, if there is no stricture within seven days, and you pause upon the wool bandage soaked in vinegar for six times and rose oil so that the abscess may rest, then tighten it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method of tightening that is to place a plaster on the fracture, and then wrap it with a wet cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm on that auxiliary, and place its hand on the side muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And wrap the cloth and tighten around the auxiliary for the arm to be in a place of stability, if there is no cause from the broken bone that prohibits this.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And now use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you place on the fracture that splint which is thicker and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break plus three fingers from both ends.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then tighten around the splints with the bandage as I have described at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your bandaging over the site of the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And the farther apart the ends of the fracture are, the looser the bandaging should be.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And thus, when you position the splints and bandaging as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its proper position, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess forming, then leave the bandaging and splints in place for seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And therefore consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that no pus or inflammation occurs; or it is prohibited for food to reach the member due to excess or constriction; and thus correct everything as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not loosen the ligature for at least three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient lie on their back, and place pillows under their head so that it is raised higher than the stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place a pad filled with wool evenly on the injured area, and at all times of the night or day, ensure that the shape of the broken limb is not loosened or dissolved, nor should the bandage be too loose; thus correct this with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And give the patient food according to the order we mentioned earlier, such that the food is light at the beginning until healing starts; and then gradually increase the quantity of food.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	For the usual practice is that the bandage and splint remain tight for forty days; and then they should be loosened, a bath given, and medicines applied with those that correct this.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is rough and uneven, then do not loosen the bandage or remove the splints for one day or even up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of a fractured arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and radius; one is small and lies under the thumb, while the other is larger and lies beneath the smaller bone, closer to the lower part.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	If only the larger bone or the smaller one is broken, and if they are broken in such a way.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller bone is broken above, the restoration of it is easy, and its healing is quicker.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the bone is broken below, the fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when two bones are broken at once.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller one above, it is appropriate for the physician, due to its easy restoration, to allow a short period of extension with ease until it is set.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the larger bone is the one that is broken, then a more vigorous extension should be allowed.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are broken at once, then it is necessary to allow for the most vigorous extension.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And it is necessary to use the figure of the hand for its restoration and extension stretched out on a board, with the wrist at the top end, higher than all the other fingers, and the thumb lower than the others, and the patient lying on a sloping bed.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And there should be a board in front of him at an appropriate height or straight ahead, so that the patient does not have to strain.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And the attendant should extend the arm from below with the patient's hand or with a splint, and another attendant should extend it from above similarly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And the surgeon should then place the bone in such a way that it regenerates in the best possible shape.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if the bone is fractured, you should then reduce all parts to their proper place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if a separate fragment appears that you cannot join and it is not within your hope to restore it, then act on it as we have described above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is accompanied by an infection, I have already dedicated a separate chapter to that, so follow the treatment described there.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with cerote made of rose oil and white wax, which is midway between thickness and subtlety, and apply it over the area where the abscess is present in a fine layer; then remove the cerote and place on an emplaster prepared from powdered myrrh mixed with clear honey, and afterwards apply plasters; let the plaster placed over that fracture be more distant and firmer.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of plasters for the arm varies depending on the major disposition, whether the fracture is in one fossa or in two adjacent fossae.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then apply your bandage over the site of the fracture more firmly and vigorously, and when it is most suitable to place pressure on the parts above or below the fracture, apply the bandage slightly looser as previously mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the thread with which they are wrapped should be of medium thickness between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and the bandage for some days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, as promptly as possible deal with the condition affecting the member, and then immerse the member in hot water until that condition subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And leave the member undisturbed until it rests, and then resume the bandaging.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the bandaging has already been loosened and the bone is already set and appears to be in a similar condition, then adjust everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider whether the nutrition is prevented from reaching the member due to excessive bandaging, for then you should loosen it slightly and leave it for some days until nutrition reaches that area, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if the patient does not experience any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to remove the bandage for about 20 days or thereabouts.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then have the patient's arm suspended by their own skill in making agitated movements, and make them lie down to sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in about 30 days or 32 days, or sometimes it is restored in 28 days, and all of this depends on the condition of the tissues and the skill involved.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of a fracture of the thumb and of the other fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that the thumb and the joints of the other fingers quickly heal from fractures, and they do not suffer any significant complications.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	When it happens that the bone is fractured or dislocated, at that moment it is necessary for the patient to lie flat and facing upwards according to equality, and to place the arm on top of that extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the surgeon should extend the broken bones and the physician should align them so that they heal properly.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	Now it is necessary to apply a plaster and cotton, unless an abscess forms in which case cauterize; then place a splint on top according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that with cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the fracture is in the parts inside the palm of the hand, then make it appear as a ball of cloth, and instruct the patient to hold that with their fractured hand; then bind it tightly with cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the splint be placed against the skin with cloth in which it is elevated, so that the splint adheres to the palm; and bind it as necessary.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	But if the fracture is in the parts outside, then it is necessary to place a splint above and another splint below on the palm, so that the hand is supported and straight; and then bind it, as if rotating the hand at the wrist with bandages.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if there is a fracture in one of the bones of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, align it as necessary and then bind it to the palm; and if you wish, place a small straight splint so that the fracture is elevated and not worsened.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	But if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the middle finger, index finger, ring finger, or little finger, then align it and bind it to the affected finger; or bind all of them continuously, which is better; or place a small splint on that finger, as we have said for the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and approach that, the disposition of the abscess both heated and opposed — according to the nature of the operation — with what is needed when some cause of those occurs, as it is repeated in the narration.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of a fracture of the collarbone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The collarbone is often fractured and is made apparent by sensation according to how it has shifted both forward and upward.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done in such a way that one bandage is stretched over the fracture and another bandage below the fracture, and the patient lies prone on their belly and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And the practitioner should extend all the bandages to their appropriate places according to their quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is closer to the shoulder joint, then the bandage should be placed at an angle towards the part of the armpit, so that the extension stops there, and the other bandage below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the fracture is closer to the armpit, then the bandage should be placed towards the armpit, and the extension should go to the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the physician equalizes the bone with both of his hands so that it is reduced according to its natural appearance and the bone is joined by proper union; now it is necessary to apply plaster and bandaging, if an abscess does not occur in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if an abscess does occur, then you should leave it alone for several days until the heated abscess subsides, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The treatment of the bandage should be done as follows: wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, and fold it two or three times, and trim off the excess; then wrap the joint so that it reaches to the thigh and the root of the spine.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert the bandage between the bone and the joint near the end towards the lower parts, and let the ends of the bandage reach to the upper part of both sides, and then wrap around the joint and the bone what is left of the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place over the bone at the location of the fracture splints, and place one strip over the bone of the joint.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the spaces between the joint and the bone with soft cloths, so that the bandaging is compacted.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin the firm bandaging from the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four layers, and as much as you move away from the site of the fracture with the bandage, your bandaging should be lighter, looser, and softer.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend both ends of the bandage towards the lower parts until it reaches the ankle, and secure both ends of the strips from the other side so that the bandaging is not moved from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then lay the bandage over that so it is such that no corrosion, abscess, swelling, or similar conditions occur to the limb; and if any of those causes should arise, then cut through the bandaging at that point and correct what has happened as soon as possible, as we have said before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If there is in the bone a splinter of bone that must be removed, then you should cut it out as much as possible; and if not, cover it over and massage it, and treat with whatever preceded the memory until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And in some cases, this fracture of the skull is strengthened by other things that are attached to it, as we have said about the helpers and the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of the limb that has been treated in this manner, lameness does not occur; but if it is restored alone, or if the other side is not similarly applied, then it is necessary for the person to limp permanently.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you should know that the skull is strengthened in forty days or a few more days, and all of this depends on the diversity of constitutions and other circumstances.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the knuckle bone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the fracture of the knuckle bone often occurs at the joints, but it also happens in other places.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	However, if there is a fracture, it is often merely a crack or bruise in its parts, and this is either a single injury or several injuries, and all of this depends on the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is such that what is broken in its parts or mentioned should be cut out, and then joined and conjoined as much as possible by means of adjustment, ease, and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply a plaster and place over it a round plate if needed; and strengthen above according to the constriction as appropriate.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And therefore consider all the positions which we have recommended for other fractures, as well as abscesses and similar conditions, so that they may be applied in such a way that is suitable to every accident and appropriate to each case until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of a fractured thigh.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is thick and is called the femur; the other is slender and is called the fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And accidents of certain types of fracture occur to both bones in the thigh as do those to the two bones in the arm, and thus restoration is performed on it similarly to the restoration of the arm, and the operation for it is the same.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if two bones are broken, the thigh is affected in all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the more slender bone is broken, the thigh is affected in the forward parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the thicker bone is broken, you will find it below, and it is of those causes which are not within your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, reduction, and fixation of the fragments accordingly.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, be careful if the thigh fracture is jagged with many fragments, that the extension be gentle and proceed with your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the thigh there is some cause for operation similar to that of the arm, which is when you align the fragments and complete the entire procedure; at this time, you will take pieces of wood from a tree that grows below the causes that are stable on stones, and make them similarly from branches of palm trees; choose those with little curvature, and not those with fingers, and their length should be according to the length of the thigh, and tie them at both ends.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Wrap each cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one at the concave side of one part and the other at the convex side of the other part, with the seam directed towards the base of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Bind the two splints in three places at both ends and at the middle, for with this structure the arch is prevented from tilting to either the right or left side, and it remains in proper position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a wooden brace has already been applied according to the length of the arch; and place it in such a way that it preserves its range of motion.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And especially do this in the case of a fracture, and when it is properly a condition requiring such treatment.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And each day consider the arch and study it carefully based on previous observations, and keep it guarded from abscesses, inflammation, or other similar causes; and when any such cause occurs, then act according to what is necessary until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the ankle and of the bones of the foot and of those mentioned.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	A complete fracture does not usually occur at the ankle; but fractures can happen to some of the bones in the foot. Fractures are less common for those bones, and they often suffer only contusions depending on their disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot are fractured and those bones are elevated above their normal position, then the patient should place their foot on prepared ground as follows.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place something on top of that which is raised from those bones, and press down on them, and press, and bind them so that they return to their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply a plaster and place padding above it, and below the chest of the patient place a small table with two flat surfaces.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then strengthen that limb with proper support, after you have wrapped it in cloths and with other means as you need.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones bound, either broken or dislocated, and the treatment in such cases is as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some say they are dislocated, then restore them, and bind them as I recommend to you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then place under the dislocated finger a stick according to the length of the finger, and add a little more; then below the patient place the table as I have recommended to you, and support it with proper binding.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if what is dislocated involves two or three or more bones, then you place under each finger a stick of its appropriate size wrapped in linen cloth, and support the table at the lower part of the body, so that it stands on one of the flat surfaces of the table to keep the chest raised for proper retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you not to forget that you should consider all the causes mentioned to you in other fractures and accidents that we have discussed; and treat each case with what is appropriate.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter Eighteen.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the fracture of the skull of a woman and of the bone of the penis and of the virile member of a man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the skull of a woman is fractured, at that moment make that incision in a crescent shape, and then slightly incline it towards the part of the back.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife should fill the skull with cotton, and it should be placed in the skull as if it were a membrane; and then the woman should be bandaged, and elevate her back little by little, for all of this is done so that before the part of the skull that was fractured heals, the bone returns to its place.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place poultices on her back, and when she needs to urinate, remove the cotton to facilitate it, and after she has urinated, reduce and return it according to the method by which you prepared it at the beginning, and then return to the original poultice.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around that time, for it is then restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and stitch onto it a reed tube; then insert the entire bladder into the skull, and blow air through the tube until the bladder is inflated inside the skull, for this will help the fracture to return.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then fill it with cotton and keep it that way for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the penis in a man or woman is fractured, at that moment administer to its restoration and alignment what we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	In what is right, it is not hidden in these nearby fractures and few become aware of it, especially for one who has some study and practice and understands my book well; because that fracture means to you in the major dispositions through straightness in the restoration and constriction of it, and thus understands well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	When the penis is to be bandaged, take a piece of leather and place the penis in it; then wrap it with cloth coverings, and let it be wrapped for three days or around that time, and it will heal.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of bone fractures when there is inflammation.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is appropriate for one who suffers a fracture with inflammation, and especially if the bone is large such as the femur or the humerus, or similar to these, that you proceed to incise and open it immediately if the conditions for incision are evident to you as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the inflammation causes bleeding, then you should proceed to arrest it by dusting over it finely powdered sugar, unless another cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay it unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess develops, then you should postpone the restoration for nine days until the abscess subsides, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, as you may cause further harm.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin, then you should proceed to reduce it and equalize it with your hands as easily and with minimal extension as possible.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension is not prepared for you and the equation of it is too large, then at those times you reduce that to your own size with this tool; and this tool which is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight digits, and the width of which is according to the quantity of the wound; and therefore it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of these according to what is needed for this in all kinds of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And let it be round, and let there be little grease on it so that it is not doubled over; during the operation, apply pressure on that.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And let it have a sharp tip at which there is a margin in its extremities; and let the upper part of it be thicker, and from the middle to the end be narrower.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called in Greek "labrum voluntz atelarem," which means a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	In order that the extremity of it may be steady, raise it up to the prominent part of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And press it in one motion so that the bone returns to its place, and let it be aligned with some support.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And thus strive to align the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken end is delicate and does not take the tool well for some reason, then you should insert the end of that bone so that the instrument has control over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone entirely as we have recommended, then insert it with one of the probes that we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in some way that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Approach cautiously him who limps from roughness and small scratches in the bone.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and during the reduction the patient feels intense pain in the tooth, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then do what will greatly help the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the bone is complete, then soak a cloth in black styptic wine, and if it is summer, apply it properly without pausing to cover the wound with wax or any other oily substance, so that decay and corruption do not occur.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And proceed to dress the wound at the appropriate time of your completion of the bone's restoration, and leave the wound uncovered so that you may excise any proud flesh with scissors and use bandages according to the extent of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be careful not to touch the wound at the fracture site, for many times unskilled doctors have done this, causing death or incurable illness or severe harm to their patients.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the swelling is slight, soft, and different from the swelling of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or is a bad wound, and you fear some of the harmful accidents we have mentioned, and you feel pain in the area, then it is not necessary to apply dressings; instead, make an enveloping bandage with hard cloths rather than dressings and apply it to that area.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when after one day or two the wound begins to generate granulation, then you remove the cloth that you had placed over it with wine, and proceed to dress it with medications, as per our custom for treating wounds, such as tetrapharmacum and similar remedies.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And you should untie the bandage and examine the wound each morning and evening until it is consolidated and firm, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a way that the pus runs from it to the lower parts with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If several days have passed and the wound has not consolidated nor has the flesh been separated from it, then you should know that this is due to the small veins, for which you must probe the wound with a probe.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those veins that are separated and removed or extracted, those from which they cannot be separated and which cause pain when the member is moved, you should proceed to incise them as much as possible according to what is feasible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the wound becomes infected with gangrene or erysipelas, which are severe forms of corruption and putrefaction, then you should proceed to one of those treatments as described in the preceding chapter on the treatment of such conditions.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And concerning the matter on which my discourse rests and you should present your approach: when the bone is broken, it protrudes from the limb as the bones do in the wrist and elbow and similar to those of large limbs, and you should not attempt to pull it out, nor its extraction after four days, for that might lead to death; instead, leave it inside where it can drain pus, for it will likely fall back into place within about twenty or thirty days; and then attend to the wound if visible, and if not, leave it be.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of swelling that occurs in the aftermath of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Sometimes these nodes occur in the traces of healing of a fracture, especially near joints, and they deform the shape of the limb; thus you should prevent the limb from its natural movement.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider whether the node is recent and administer medicines that have a styptic effect such as aloes, myrrh, cumin, saffron, and acorus; take any of these or all of them. Confirm with one of these styptics, egg white, or vinegar, and apply this over the node on lint, then bind it tightly with proper compression.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And let the bandage remain tight so that you do not loosen it for several days; then remove it and reapply another one until the node is softened; or apply a sheet of lead gently over it, because lead has the property of reducing anything swollen in limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the node has already turned to bone and is hard, and the necessity requires that it be removed immediately, then cut into it at its most prominent part, remove the superfluous and prominent portion, or reduce it with some instruments until it is softened; and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of fractures when they have been set and subsequently the limb is moved gently but not according to its usual nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture has been set and the limb is subsequently moved gently, this is done for various reasons: one of which is excessive soaking of the bandages and ligature not according to what is needed; or due to too much compression preventing proper nutrition from reaching the limb; or due to an excess of unnecessary poultices; or due to premature movement; or due to a lack of blood in the patient's body and weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The treatment is to give the patient food, and make his heart tender so that blood may be multiplied within him; administer baths; and apply poultices and lint to him.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And apply plasters to the limb so that the plaster may draw nourishment to it, or continue rubbing with cold water, until nutrition flows and returns it to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of broken bones when they are set crookedly and it is prohibited to operate on them further.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens to a limb that has already been restored near its healing from crookedness and prominence of the broken bone and nodosity, and it is because of this that the shape of the limb is considered flawed, but since the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, then there is no need for you to accept the word of one who believes that member to be newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But there are false physicians and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is a reprehensible one leading to great fear, the sign of which is deadly.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if limping and nodosity are recent, then it is necessary to rub them with cold water in which you soak softening herbs such as chamomile and radish leaves, and melilot, and similar ones; and a plaster should be made with a softening agent as well prepared; or take mucilage of radish seeds and mix it with flour of linseed or olive oil, and apply it as a plaster; or take fatty figs and grind them with dove's milk, and similarly with the medicines mentioned for strengthening consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And in some cases it is dissolved by constant gentle friction which is applied to the most fluid parts, and motion of the limb should be administered in all directions at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the inflammation has already advanced and become hard and converted into stone, thus necessitating treatment with iron, then it is necessary for the pus above to be drained and the continuation of the bone to be dissolved, and for that which is superfluous from the nodes of that matter on the bone to be excised with subtle instruments, and ease should be administered in this while being careful and studious.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On the treatment of dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the wrongful displacement of one of the joints from its proper place, thereby prohibiting movement, distorting the figure of the limb, and causing severe pain and great injury.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	When a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to attempt reduction as soon as possible and not delay in doing so, for if it is delayed, inflammation will set in and make the reduction of the dislocation more difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, one should not wait or delay during the inflammatory stage, as doing so often leads to spasms and intense pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when this happens, it is necessary to prepare for the incision of the inflamed area, and then allow time for the inflammation to subside; afterwards, the limb should be bathed with hot water and oil, and then reduction should be attempted with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And treat the entire limb with whatever remedies will come to mind for its proper care.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	Here are the bones set in order as previously described for fractures; now I enter into the part concerning wounds more prevalent.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIIIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So when both jaws are dislocated and if they do not reduce easily; the dislocation of both can be done in one of two ways: either they are reduced from their positions with slight manipulation, and become slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated and thoroughly separated, such that they are softened at the joint where saliva flows from the mouth and the patient cannot close it, and the tongue is wrapped around the jaw.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But when the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its proper position on its own with little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is complete and thorough, it must be that reduction should be administered promptly, and not delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the assistant hold the patient's head, and the physician insert his thumb on one side into the root of the dislocated jaw inside the mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both thumbs simultaneously if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers are outside equally; and commands the patient to relax their jaws and move them from each side; and the physician equalizes the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated simultaneously, it must be that warm water and oil fumigation is administered, until gentle reduction can be performed on both, and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And so when returning to the bandages, and the mouth of the wound is closed and not softened, then pause over those powders of cloth with wax, and let it be made of wax and rubbed oil; and afterwards let it be applied with ease to the soft parts.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their side, and their head be placed between the two ears, so that it does not turn to either the right or left; and do not force them to chew for any reason; having their food should be cut up finely, until when the pains have subsided and the jaws are relaxed, then allow them to eat what they want.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth for eating and drinking and other actions, until the jaw is relaxed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of both jaws when they are dislocated at some point and not returned to their places is difficult, then fevers and frequent sweats occur, and the belly of the patient swells easily, and there is vomiting of pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then you know that it is hopeless; and many times the one to whom this happens dies within x days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The clavicle is not dislocated from the chest towards the interior by its continuation to the ribs; and sometimes it is dislocated outward, and this is perceived by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And for the restoration of the hand, the patient lies on his back and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then compress the area with your palm firmly, for it will return to its proper state.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then apply the poultice and powder to that area.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the extremity of that which is connected to the spine and continues from it is not dislocated on any day; therefore, it must be reduced and treated as we have said and according to what you have prepared.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the poultice, powder, and bandage, and instruct the patient to maintain tranquility and rest until he is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its proper place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the upper part to the lower part.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and this happens rarely; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is most often dislocated and moved out at the lower parts below the joint, and more easily in those whose flesh is thin; but in those with thick flesh, it is harder to move out.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	If it happens that any person is struck or falls and the muscle of the place becomes abscessed due to inflammation, and is rendered displaced as if it were dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then proceed to treat it as if you were treating it with the methods appropriate for its condition, and now proceed with its treatment.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of it is known when it is at the lower parts beyond the tendon; thus you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal one, for you find obvious differences among them; and you find a concavity at the head of the muscle, and below the tendon there is the touch of the head of the muscle as if by a man, and the injured person cannot return their hand to its socket, nor can they move that part.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated below the foot or above, then you immediately find a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And this dislocation is easily reduced when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the practitioner raises the arm above the shoulder; then place your hands below the tendon, and with strength return the joint to its proper place, and the practitioner raises the arm, and extends it out straight; then let it rest as it returns easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return as we have said, and after the initial days since the dislocation occurred, then it is necessary to bathe the patient in warm water and administer a lotion that softens and relaxes as if for rheumatism, using substances such as mustard seeds, fenugreek, and mallow in water, and apply it.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Let the patient lie supine on their back and place under them a soft cushion of wool that is neither too loose nor too tight. Then the surgeon places his hand under the patient’s chin, elevates the neck muscle upward, and holds the patient's arm so it is not injured behind, while another assistant hold the patient's head so it is not hurt from behind, for that part immediately returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce it according to this method: have another man present who is taller than the patient, and let him stand on the side where the injury is. Insert his muscle under the chin of the patient and elevate the chin upwards so that the patient hangs in the air, while another assistant holds the patient's arm from behind the patient’s stomach.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is heavier, it is necessary to find another way to suspend them, so that they do not strain themselves, for the dislocation will immediately return.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in this other way: Drive a long pole into the ground with its top rounded like a mortar head, neither too thick nor too thin. Place it under the patient; then lay strong cloths over the top of the pole. The patient should stand along the length of the pole, and extend one arm behind to the side opposite them. With strength, extend the body on the other side, as the joint will quickly return to its place.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction of the patient is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this treatment: Take a pole that is two cubits in length, four fingers in width, and whose thickness should be such that it fits under the chin according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And on the round head place linen cloths so that the flesh does not injure the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And let a pad be placed under the buttocks of the patient, and let the arm or the hand be extended over the body between the parts below, and let the body be wrapped around the assistant and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And let the arm be placed on a step of a ladder according to its length, and let the hand be extended toward the parts below, and let the other side be suspended from the other side, because the joint will soon follow.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument is completed according to each manner that is possible for you, then place beneath the buttocks a pad of woolen cloth of equal thickness; and then place on an adhesive plaster prepared with powdered mallow roots and egg white over all the muscle, as mentioned above, and then tightly bind below the buttocks with proper constriction; and the bandage should be wrapped around the plaster, and the hand should be attached to the neck, and it should be left alone, and do not move the patient's hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And it is necessary to give the patient food in small amounts until the limb is strengthened, for it is easier for their recovery.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food should be given more freely after seven or five days, and one movement should be exercised; and when it is firm and not softened, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated due to swelling that occurs or for some other reason, then it should be treated with cautery in three places, as was stated earlier in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after about seven days the bandage is removed and the joint has not been secured, and the plaster and strapping are reduced several times, and it cannot be fixed so that he can raise his arm above the part, then you know that the nerves which run to the end of the muscle have either been cut or stretched or weakened, and know that the joint will never be restored to its proper place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Regarding the dislocation that occurs from the foot and the hip or the posterior parts, the reduction is performed with impulse and extension as much as necessary until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And let the other strapping be administered there, and care for it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if heaviness and slowness in movement occur near the healing of the limb, then the patient should use baths several times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the neck.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; and it can be dislocated in all directions, but mostly forward or backward. The dislocation is not concealed from you when it appears as if it has fallen away below the view or touch according to some figure it may have been displaced. And when you adjust the dislocated neck with the hand, this is clearly shown to you because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor reach its usual muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And you should treat the neck, and reduce the dislocation as soon as it occurs before it becomes an abscess or ulcer, for if it reaches that state, reduction will be difficult, and full recovery is unlikely. This is especially true when the dislocation is to the rear, as this type of dislocation is worse than all others, more painful, and often leads to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it is such that when it can be reduced, the hand should be extended across two boards, and the arm should be expanded, and the physician's hands should be on either side of the joint below it, and he should press the joint with his fingers together or with the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is to the front parts, then it returns in such a way that the hand is bent towards itself, until it strikes the elbow with the palm of his hand.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then vigorous extension and strong motion should be administered.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and there should be those firmly holding both sides so that it does not move due to the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And the arm should be rotated around completely, as it is wrapped in folded cloth long over the hand, or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that these are those causes which help in the lubricity of the joint for ease; and then press the joint with vigorous pressure until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And after the reduction, it is necessary for him to rest on a plaster that has styptic and cohesive properties with an egg albumen base, and be bandaged tightly, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and he should be left alone for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it should be loosened; and thus if the joint is formed in its proper place, now you loosen the bandage of the arm and let it be.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint should not be stitched, then apply the plaster and bandage again, and leave it like that for several days until it is healed; after which you may remove it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If it happens that there is great pain during the reduction of the joint and its position is in motion, then administer moistening with baths and gentle friction, and compression until it becomes calm; or place upon the joint something cold, which reduces movement; and afterwards bind it, and leave it on the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And afterwards take that off and place it in water; when it is cool, then you should rub the joint with moderate friction, and afterwards apply something cold to it again, which reduces movement, once, and the second time, and the third time,
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	with a bathing instrument until it is finished.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place on it pieces of boiled and softened cowhide and stitch them; and do this several times, for these are moist and help to restore its position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation of the elbow joint, which is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Dislocation of the hand sometimes occurs, and the reduction of such dislocation is easy, but the opposite is true for other joints. However, it is important to act with speed in reducing it at the hour when it has occurred, before swelling sets in or an abscess forms.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of such dislocation is that you place the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and the assistant extends the patient's arm, and the physician places his hand or palm over the prominence of the joint, and presses it until it returns to its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it must be considered whether the palm is fixed to the belly of the hand. If this is the case, then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation precedes the fingers, then the position of the hand should be placed directly on the table so that the doctor's hand can act immediately upon the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns immediately, that is good; and if not, then strengthen that area with a bandage over the abscess and leave it like that; and do not repeat this procedure, because otherwise, it will neither be endured nor can you prevent the pus from spreading over the days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint moves according to its curvature; and if you notice nothing in the patient that would cause this, except that the hand is soft and cannot be strengthened by any means; then know that the nerves are compressed or torn, and there is no remedy but to cauterize it properly for the case and strengthen it as far as possible without causing further injury.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	When it has been returned properly, then place the bandage that we have recommended on it, and leave it and strengthen it for five days; and afterward, remove it and leave it, and exercise the hand.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	However, if the movement of the limb is restricted and you encounter any severity in it, then apply it with warm water and friction several times until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the Treatment of the Dislocation of the Said Joints.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	In some cases, the said joints are dislocated completely.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a finger is dislocated at one of the joints toward the palm or toward the base, hold the finger steady and apply pressure to return the dislocation with your fingers until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then hold the tip of the finger, and suspend that part which is dislocated, and leave it like this for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend that part and extend it until it is properly bandaged on that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, wrap that part according to the narration, and do not stop unwrapping it during the day and exercising with movement, and wrap it at night; and do this for several days until it is strong.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same for this if it is dislocated at the base of the hand, and wrap it in that part and perform the first operation like this until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And do the same for this when it is dislocated at the other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the vertebrae of the back or neck and the vertebrae move out of their places, then there is no cure in that case, for death is feared for the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	The sign of this is that the excretion from the patient occurs without their will, and they cannot control it; and often some parts of them become weak or two limbs or two arms or one of these; or a vertebra is displaced from its place, as sometimes it moves and sometimes the displacement goes to four directions.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Thus it is turned toward the rear parts and is named gelbozitation.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The cure for it is that you consider whether the gelbozitation occurs due to puerperium, because at that time there is no cure and no healing from it.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in the case where it comes from trauma or impact or something similar to those, the Ancients described the methods of treatment at length, much of which returns to being overly detailed; but I have abbreviated that part, sparing from excess due to my closeness to understanding and my exposition, with which I have made this explanation and formation from a different instrument than that with which I would show this and demonstrate that.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And he says that in gelbozitation which occurs in the front part of the thighs, there is neither remedy nor healing for it; and similarly for those made on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And those are not cured except for the one that occurs precisely as I mention.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient lies on their back near a wall, and is placed below a well-padded cushion so that the legs are not strained.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And nearby a straight post should be placed, fixed in the ground at the end near the head of the cushion, and another post around the feet at the other end of the cushion.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister should hold one post, and it should not be fixed in a hole; another minister should hold the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And nearby wrap around the head of the patient and below the shoulders with a firm linen bandage; extend the end of the bandage to the post that is behind the head, and secure it there; then tighten the other bandage over the hips near the armpits, and behind the thighs; then adjust all the bandages and secure them to the other post that is behind the feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the minister shall extend the ligature at the part of the stump, and let not the two stumps and their respective ligatures be removed from the places in which they are fixed, but rather let them not be secured as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the physician shall place his palms on the strong part of the spine until it returns, or let him place upon that one table, and then adjust upon the table his own weight until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return by this method, now take a table whose width or length is about three arms, and dig into the wall near the patient a place where the end of the table can fit.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place half of the table on the spine, and the physician place his weight on the other end, and gently pull until the spine is compressed and returns to its proper place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open again the one that is revolved with the hand; and it is that you place on the ground behind the patient's head at the end of two stumps, the length of which is one arm, and behind the patient's neck at the end of two similar stumps; and let the distance between each stump be a palm, and each should be firmly fixed to the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be one round rod in which is the wheel, and it should revolve in the two sockets of the two stumps.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a socket in which the rod is formed, the length of which is one palm where it revolves; and on the other two stumps there is something similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Unbind the bandages that you have tightly applied to the patient’s feet at the time when you were preparing to cut off his head, and the bandages that you have bound tightly around his thighs at the time when you were supposed to cut off his legs.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	You should have each turn held by a minister with his hand, and the surgeon should twist the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And after the spine is returned to its place and the area has been adjusted, now you should apply an excrescent plaster on a piece of cloth, and then add cotton; and afterward place over the plaster strips of wood with a width of three fingers or thereabouts, and a length that covers the affected area around the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then wrap it with the bandage as we have described, and use a light diet for the patient until he is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any stiffness in the area at the end of the healing process, you should administer medicines that soften and lubricate over an extended period according to our recommendation; and a sheet of lead has already been applied to that area.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And at times stiffness occurs in the lower part of the spine due to dislocation; and that bone is such that it may become dangerous if you attempt to treat it with this medicine, as it could easily lead to death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the Treatment of a Dislocated Hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the broad part and the joint of the muscle is subject only to dislocation, and does not suffer what happens to other joints with small movement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the broad part is dislocated in four ways, for it can be dislocated inwardly, outwardly, forward, or backward.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is most commonly dislocated inwardly, and rarely forward or backward.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation inward is that when you adjust the leg of the patient on the healthy side along with the affected side, it becomes longer and the heel more prominent than in a healthy state, and the patient cannot bend their foot towards the shin, and this place where bending occurs is prone to abscess from cauterization, so the head of the bone has already reached here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of one to whom dislocation occurs outwardly is that the symptoms are contrary to those of the aforementioned condition.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of one to whom dislocation occurs forward is that when the leg is raised according to its full extent, it does not bend due to pain in the heel, and if they attempt to walk, they cannot move forward; and their urine is retained and their swallowing is difficult, and they should walk on the heel.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of one to whom dislocation occurs backward is that they cannot extend the heel, nor can they bend forward as much as when swallowing, and the leg is shorter than the other, and swallowing is difficult, and the head of the bone is in that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The final reduction of the kinds of this dislocation is that you consider, at this time, if the dislocation is old and ancient, which already has been there for a long time, you administer reduction to it and rest according to its disposition; now it is not in that cure entirely; and then it does not have to be made with excessive force.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In the case where the dislocation is recent and is one of the four kinds of dislocations, now you should look to that which will return the joint to its proper place, extending it both inward and outward, and move it from side to side, for it returns easily without needing further treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	However, if it does not return in this manner, now you should prepare a strong assistant and extend the limb from below, or with its fingers, or with a bandage that lies above the joint; and another assistant extends the hand of that person above so as to place their fingers below the joints; and then tighten a lion's skin bandage over the crook of the arm, and have another assistant hold tightly at the end of the bandage.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And this extension of the limb or the part inward to the angle of the shoulder blade, or of the part behind to the part of the back.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And this extension of all these at once should be done while the patient is raised off the ground and remains hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this kind of extension is common to all four types.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and if not, now it is necessary for all kinds what I will say about its proper treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the shoulder, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is to the inner side, the patient should be laid on his back; and then place the bandages along the ridge of the shoulder in that part which lies between the head of the humerus and the clavicle; and then extend the bandage from the angle as far as possible towards the sternum.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another strong assistant should take hold of the patient’s arms and forcefully press down on the thick part of the dislocated humerus while extending it outward with great force, for thereby it returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this particular case is the easiest to cure among those in which this member is reduced compared to the other cases.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if it is excused on you and you do not obey the exercise with this particular method of treatment at all, then bind both sides of the patient tightly together with a strong, light bandage over both heels and both toes.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each of them be four fingers, and let the affected side be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then the patient should be suspended at the top of a post and held by his hands; and let the distance from him to the ground be two arms' lengths.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong youth to press down on the head of the humerus, and let another youth hold the patient, while this other youth presses the arm with great force, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the reduction of the shoulder, when the dislocation is to the outer side, the patient should lie on his back as we have recommended for treating stiffness; and let the bandage be tightly wrapped around the affected side and over his feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Place the poles beside him, one at his feet and the other at his head; and place beside them rods adjusted to the middle of his back, laid upon which wet cloths should be wrapped around him, so that the patient is not harmed by the pole being among things belonging to him, so that the extension to the parts below is not pulled away.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each minister extends to his part, and the surgeon with his hands applies the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you obey the reversal, it will be very good; and if not, place it carefully as we have said for jaundice by this method.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But it is necessary that the patient lie on his side calmly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is to the front parts, then it is necessary that the bench be extended quickly, and according to this method of narration on the back; and the surgeon places the palm of his right hand on the patient's lower abdomen, and with that compression uses the other hand to extend towards the rear parts.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is to the rear parts, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended towards the back, and he should be raised off the ground; but it is necessary that he be placed on a hard surface, just as it is necessary in the same way if his hip is dislocated outward, according to what we have said about positioning him on two boards; and it is on his face with his limbs extended, as we have said, otherwise there will be no cure.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it is necessary to administer compression on the table at the location where the joint is.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Thus, when the reduction is complete as it should be — and the sign of the reduction is not hidden from you, and that is when you extend the patient’s limb in two directions, and when you see those lines and the patient moves the affected limb and expands it for its own comfort, then you know that the member as it should be has been returned — and then you adjust two things and pause with bandaging and wrap both bindings such that the width is not diminished in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then loosen the bandage and wrapping, and compare one limb to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Now, if you see those lines clearly, then you know that the dislocation has already been fixed, and then allow the patient to go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of inflammation, then you return and treat that area, and bandage it according to your initial structure, and allow it to rest for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then loosen that area, and allow the patient to delay in walking on it for several days until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the elbow.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The elbow can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward, inward, and downward towards the back; it cannot be dislocated forward.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of elbow dislocation is that when you instruct the patient to apply their limb to the joint, then you know that the elbow is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And for the restoration of all methods of which you must perform surgery on the patient rightly, namely that you extend his leg if possible; adhere your hand to his face and place your foot between his thighs; then proceed to adhere the tip of his penis with your palms, and hold those between your said hands firmly upon the tip of his penis so that it returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of recovery for him is that his leg adheres to the body without laborious effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply a plaster to that and make his leg adhere to the body, and then bind those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then unbind them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not allow the patient to walk for some days until he is healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of it by you is unnecessary, now administer extensive treatment with the bandages as previously described in the cure of the hip.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of dislocation of the thigh.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The thigh sometimes is displaced by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated completely, and the dislocation of it occurs either toward the interior parts or toward the exterior parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of it is that you see the thigh swollen proceeding toward the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the treatment of its displacement is easy recovery, and it should be extended with ease using bandages so that it returns to its proper place.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	In the treatment of the humerus when it is dislocated as a second step, make sure you lay the patient straight, and let there be a strong and capable minister behind him at his mid location.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And place yourself with your right hand on the most superior part of the foot, and with your left hand on the lower part of the foot at the location of the heel.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the foot towards your right hand, and then place your left hand underneath twice, and then extend the left hand; and press the foot's sole with your right hand against the thigh while working.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this two times as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then press the sole of the foot against the thigh for the third time, and you will be at the heel.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore, if it returns in one attempt or two according to this method, and if the foot becomes straightened, it is good; and if not, then proceed with the operation again, as it has returned.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if it is prohibited for you to reduce it as we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a sturdy board fixed to the ground under them, and let it fit between the bones, and you should wrap the patient in a cloth so that they do not move.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister holding the patient should hold their bones, and another minister should extend the foot with his hands or with a bandage placed on the neck of the foot; and then each minister should stretch against the extension of their side, and the board should be extended between the patient's bones retaining it, so that the body does not be pulled towards the parts below during the extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	The surgeon holds the displaced bone with his hands, and another assistant holds the healthy bone in place below, for the displacement returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the displacement returns and the reduction is declared to be healthy, apply a plaster and wrap it tightly with strong bandages, and bind the limb to the chest.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful to avoid the nerves which are behind the heel, so that the bandage over them is not too tight and does not injure them severely.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And let that be for two days or three; and if the bandage is loosened, wrap it again.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And on the third day or fourth, remove that bandage, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if the patient is forced to move before that time, there is no guarantee that the displacement will not dissolve and become corrupted, and then it will be beyond cure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if an abscess needs to be cauterized, then you should proceed according to the instructions in our narrative on that subject, in another section about treatment and application, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Said Ankle Bones.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Ensure that the person who is dislocated is treated with some extension without labor; and what is not difficult is often easy.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in any of the joints of the foot, then you should have the patient lie down with their affected foot on a firm surface or table, and position it as if they were standing.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Stand aside and let the patient lie on what is below the joints, and then press with your foot against it firmly until it returns to its place, so that you see it flattened and does not appear in a prominent location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place the sole of the foot on a table that will support the entire foot, which has two ends, and then bind it with a proper and firm bandage for three days; then unbind it and let it rest by walking on it for ten days, until it is strengthened and recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	About the types of dislocation that are caused by injury, fracture, or any combination thereof.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of those causes occur, and you proceed with the treatment of it and the restoration of the patient, sometimes death may result.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And because of this, one should not presume to undertake the treatment themselves, but rather it should be done by someone who is wise in the art, experienced over time, compassionate and pious, neither hasty nor presumptuous; and at the beginning, use medicines that only reduce swelling, and leave the patient's fate to divine judgment, unless there is hope of recovery from the illness and where some promise appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then strive to perform the reduction for the patient as soon as possible at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes swollen and severe.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the limb returns as we wish, immediately administer a regimen that reduces swelling and treat the injury with what is appropriate from among the dry remedies.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is with a fracture and it happens in the bones that are separated, then you perforate their membrane, and do what we have said about the simple diseases concerning what precedes in those places.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your virtue that which pertains to the instruments in the ways of fear as it has been foretold in my preaching; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and more salutary for your true body, which will be revealed in His time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Albucasis perfectly; may God be blessed for them.
Amen.	Amen.
