Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begins the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, my children, now I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the medical sciences. By its completion, by what it contains, and by its exposition and clarification, in my view I have explained to those who love me this treatise, which is part of what I do with my hands, namely surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For surgical practice has been completely abandoned in our region and in our time, except that the science of it is rare, and its remnants remain; and there are no descriptions of it other than small ones in the books of the Ancients, which have altered much of what they contain, leading to errors and hesitation, because they obscure the intentions of surgery and weaken its power and art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I should revive this treatise according to the order of exposition, explanation, and abbreviation; and so that it may come with the forms of cautery tools and other instruments for the work as it is through the addition of explanations, and their preparation, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the reason why a good craftsman is not found in our time in this field of surgery is that medical science is extensive, and it requires the practitioner to be well-versed in anatomy, which involves knowing the functions of the members and their forms, as well as their conjunctions and separations; and to have knowledge of bones, nerves, and muscles, along with their numbers and distribution; and of pulsating veins and static veins, and the locations for dissecting them.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this reason Hippocrates said that in name there is much, but in the work there is little, especially in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	This may we have said already at the beginning of this book; for whoever is not aware of what we have said about anatomy cannot be exempt from falling into error through which men are rendered dead, as I have seen too many of them, for some are formed in this science and throw themselves into it without that knowledge and experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a mad physician who had incised an abscess in the neck of a woman and cut some arteries of the neck, so that much blood flowed out causing the woman to die immediately.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another physician who thought he would remove a stone from a man who was ill in his state, and the stone was large, and when he came to him he extracted that stone along with a piece of the bladder, so that on the third day that man died.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I had already realized that it was impossible to remove that stone, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another physician who was receiving payment from a duke of our land to perform surgery, and he attended to a black castrated man who had a fracture in his skull; due to the physician's ignorance, he exposed the fracture over the wound with bandages and strong binding, but did not leave room for drainage.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And shortly after he loosened it according to his desires, and then he dressed it again, and afterwards he left it like that for several days and commanded us to remove the bandage; and thus it remained until the skull and the bone became abscessed, leading to his ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	Thus he calls to him, and prepares to loosen the ligature, and having obtained calm he begins to relieve his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But when corruption was confirmed in the limb, so that it could not be restrained, and the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until danger threatened the patient.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another surgeon who punctured a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated near the thighs, until the malignancy spread throughout the body of his lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason for this is that cancerous tumors are free of melancholic humor; therefore, it does not need to affect the whole body, but rather can be in a limb which suffers from being fully affected.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, my children, it is necessary for you that the operation be planned in two aspects: one is an operation associated with health, and the other is work in which there is risk even under the best conditions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already expressed this in every part of this book where an operation involves both error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to heed this and avoid that, so that your hands do not find a way to speak against you and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And so take up your arms with diligence and the protection of God, and treat your patients with skill and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best path by God's grace to lead to health and praiseworthy success, and avoid terrible diseases that are difficult to heal, and remain armed against what causes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and reputation does not betray you: for it is better for your glory, and more in this world and at last for your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Wine should be used in some surgical procedures:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat illness badly, for then bad doctors would not be named.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And thus I have dedicated this book in three parts.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begins the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered on the head inside-out, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cauteries, and of what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on cutting and puncturing, and on cupping, and on plasters, and on the extraction of arrows and similar items, all chaptered and ordered in the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the treatment of fractures and similar conditions; a chapter ordered concerning the head inside-out, and in the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	About cauterization with fire and with sharp medicine and recall of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that begins the treatise of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I shall speak of the quality of the movements of that cautery and of its effects, and in what condition cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the speech about the quality of the movement of cautery and its effects is long and extensive, subtle by science, and hidden as a secret; many wise people have spoken about it, and they disagree on it. But for me, a little of their speeches suffices to avoid prolongation.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	Therefore, I say that cauteries apply universally to all complete structures, whether they have material or not, with the exception of two structures, which are tailless structures.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the tail and dry structure that has material, it dries out; for some people say that cauterization is helpful for this, while others say the opposite, that cauterization is not appropriate in a disease caused by heat and dryness, because the nature of fire is hot and dry, and it is not beneficial to treat a tail and dry condition with something that is hot and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And those who say the opposite are mistaken, that cauterization is beneficial for every tail and dry disease that occurs in human bodies, because when you compare the body of a person and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find that the human body is cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say according to the words of that person, that experience has already shown this to me on several occasions.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But I do not intend to go into detail about that for one who has already been instructed and trained in the chapter on cauterization through previous exercise, and who knows the diversity of human structure and the disposition of diseases in their seasons, as well as the causes of them and their accidents, and the time span of these.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other structures, there is no need for concern, especially in cold and humid diseases, because all doctors are now in agreement about those, and they do not disagree on the use of cauterization in such cases.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And you know, my children, that the secret of healing through cauterization with fire and its effectiveness lies in the fact that fire is simple, and its action affects only the member being cauterized and does not harm other parts adjacent to it except slightly.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	Here is the English translation:
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Take the fire, by its sublimity and goodness of its substance, it does nothing but superfluify. And it is known to us through experiment and length of service in the study of the art about the truth of the causes; and thereby I excuse myself from the length of speech. And if not that it were read in my book at this place I hide secret with the fire, and the quality of its operation on the bodies and expulsion thereof by which you expel diseases, in philosophical demonstrative speech, would be acuity in your heads.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to perform cautery and they pause at the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the harm caused by accidental time is submerged in the benefit of what is attracted through cautery, and even more so if the cautery is for pains or necessary pain, strong and urgent, which cannot tolerate delay due to fear of those things that may cause malice, which is worse than a small harm entering through an inconvenient time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And this does not occur in your minds, or, children, it is only valued by the common people and foolish doctors that for the illness which is cured by cautery, it is not always opportune, and they pause at that moment.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the reason is not as such because they think about it, for cautery is nothing but a substitute for medicine that alters the complexion and dries the humidity which is the cause of pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But nevertheless, cautery surpasses medicine in its efficacy and the virtue of its operation and the greatness of its power.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that his illness may return at some time according to the condition of the patient and the location of the illness, and its nature, and what has been prepared in his body from the accumulation of excesses within him, and what he acquires through food and similar causes; but if the disease for which cauterization is administered is a subtle one with little excess and moisture, such as tooth cauterization for pain and similar cases, it is possible that the pain will not return in him, although this applies to minor instances.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And the common saying is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and this is said by barbers, not by those who understand it, for I believe that there is no cure gained through medicine or any other cause before cauterization.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and the understanding that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer methods of treatment for certain illnesses, and those medicines are ineffective, and at the end of the cause, cauterization is administered, and it proves effective in such cases.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And here from what was said before that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which I understand of the common and excesses of foolish physicians.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place for cauterization does not matter, which is not absolutely true, because I have found it proven and corrected that this applies only to certain bodies and not others, and cauterization with gold is good and better than iron as they say; but when you make cauterization with fire using gold, it is not clear to you, for it depends on the quantity you want due to the hardness of gold, and it prepares to receive friction; and if you adjust over it with fire, the gold melts by the heat, and placing some sheets in the fire allows the craftsman to shape it according to that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And thus with water is made the cautery of iron; you should remove the pus lightly and properly according to the correctness of the procedure.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to the chapters, and I have arranged those of the head among the more serious cases, so that I alleviate the seeker who asks for what he wants from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On cautery for headache due to cold and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery is applied to the cold and moisture that cause headaches and two other conditions resulting from these causes: one is caused by soda and many cases of traumatic flux, called herpes, affecting the head and parts of the ears with fluid discharge, and many cases of sleepiness, toothache, and gullet pain, and generally all diseases that come from coldness, such as paralysis, stroke, and similar conditions.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: first, command the patient to evacuate with a laxative medicine that cleanses the head for three or four nights, according to what you require based on the strength of the patient and their age and usual habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then place him sitting between the sheets on a padded bench and have him rest his head on his hands.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the razor in your palm near the spot above the nose between the eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But when the temperature of your left hand reaches it, mark that spot with ink, and then apply the olive oil cautery, which has this form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And after pausing on that spot marked with a tent, in the manner which descends, with which the skin may be gradually stretched, and you turn it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then move your hand gently and look at the spot, and if you see any amount of bone already uncovered, as much as the amount of grain in one's palm, then raise your hand, and if not return your hand to that tool, or another like it, if it is cooled, until you can see the bone as I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the spot and let it be for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then pause on the embedded knot at the border and let it be inside until the burn scar is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the spot with a quadrature ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it is said that when the wound has become completely covered with new flesh, the sooner the bandage is removed, the better and more helpful it is.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them say that the wound should be cauterized down to the bone, and the cautery should be held until it adheres to some part of the bone.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then rasp what is adhered to the bone, and then treat it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that with the cautery reach to the deepest part, until it presses firmly on the bone until the bone melts, and this is the method of alpeccati (cauterizing slightly):
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that spot emanate the vapors of the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let the wound be treated for a long time until it is healed and has begun to heal properly.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two species of cautery used on everyone in the same way out of fear; and leave that one, as I believe, it is better for health when it is so; for the head is easily injured by a solution of continuity just like we have testified with other members, and especially when the patient's constitution is cold.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first species of cautery is safer and better, in my opinion; and from that one use it for the sake of health.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head and this is prolonged in the patient, and you use plasters, poultices, caps, ointments, compresses, cataplasms, and similar treatments, especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that I mentioned but to no avail for any of those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution in its nature; and if it is not cold and you find significant inflammation, then at that time cauterize with another type of cautery after that one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize it above the crown of their head with cautery until the pain is relieved.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut open the area of pain and expose the bone in the quantity that we have described, and cauterize it with a cautery at the back of the head in the place called "vas," — which is the location where the temporal vein is situated.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And do this with your hand in this way, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will experience great pain from it different from the pain of all other cauteries of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I will describe this cautery in its place, for it is more delicate than the one used to cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput; and this is its form.
Capitol ters.	Chapter Three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On Cauterization of Recent Wounds.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When severe pain is located in the forehead or persistent pain within the head occurs, it should be treated with medicines that cleanse the head, and other treatments should be administered as I have described for various illnesses. And if this does not help, then cauterization can be performed in two ways: either using a sharp burning medicine or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But if you use a burning medicine for the cautery, then take a piece of dough made from alum, dry it thoroughly, and remove both ends of it.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then you should incise the area of the pain on the temple with a lancet slightly below the hairline so that it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then apply pressure to it with bandages for continuous compression for three hours; then loosen them and remove the alum, and leave the wound covered for two or three days. After that, place a poultice soaked in butter on it until the area becomes warm.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for it with remedies until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, use those medicines which I have written in the second treatise on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And this is how you perform cautery with iron using this cautery tool, which has the following form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called a key clamp because the head of it resembles the shape of a nail head, which has some curvature, and in the middle part of it there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place it on the location of the pain and hold your hand — so that the artery below is not adhered to — and move the iron slightly back and forth quickly.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount that is adhered due to the curvature is as much as half of it, raise your hand so that the artery below is not adhered, so that there is no bleeding.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak cotton in salt water and place it on the location, and leave it for three days; and afterward apply honey around it, and subsequently treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, perform cautery at the end of the radius according to the cautery method, and be careful not to cut the artery in this non-traditional procedure.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the cautery of an ancient incision.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat an incision with what we have said about the previous treatment and the divisions of diseases, and if it does not improve, and sometimes due to the disease it is insufficient for what we have mentioned about the first cautery with medicine or fire cautery, then you should ignite the radial cautery until it becomes white-hot. Place it on the site of the pain in a line whose length is half the width of your finger or slightly more; then lift your hand quickly and press it strongly so that it cuts into the artery but does not reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, you must guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which is necessary for chewing, and ensure that the muscle is not adhered and the nerves which animate it are not damaged, so that spasm does not occur.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the care and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is being tied off, because there is fear in doing so, especially for one who does not know what they are doing and is not skilled and experienced; and leave the operation at that point at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And here I will come to the recollection of the management of blood flow from an artery according to the usual method, in its place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this disease does not respond to these cauteries and the patient's condition is tolerable, cauterize in the appropriate place of the head as we have recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you perform the cauteries that we have mentioned in the chapter on the rupture of an artery with a cautery having two prongs, this is a better and more effective cautery.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cautery for ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain in the ear occurs due to friction and is treated with laxative causes and with the other treatment that I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain does not improve, now use the cautery, which is called puncta. This is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And approach the puncta to the fire, and move it around the entire ear as a wheel revolves, or around each part if the pain is in that part.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Hold the cautery on the rim of the ear little by little until you have marked the place with it.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if you apply the cautery at these points throughout the ear, and wherever it is needed, and then treat the areas until they heal.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cautery of the throat.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The throat that is cured by cautery and not through medication is caused solely by phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery for the type that results from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that type of throat condition with herbs and purgatives and other remedies, but your treatment does not provide relief, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the illness in three places: the first at the rim of the ear, the second slightly below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cautery at the opposite side of the affected area, for relief does not come from the part that is diseased but from the surrounding healthy tissue.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cautery is that you cauterize the affected area with the cautery at the right extremity of the ear slightly above the horn of the head, and at the temple in another place, the length of which should be according to the length of a thumb, and then pause your hand with the cautery until half the quantity of the condition is consumed.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is specific to the surgeon, whose form is laid out above.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But more subtle is that which you see in a small amount; and it is necessary to use the knife instead of excessive coarseness in a small amount.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And properly care for the place with water as it was previously treated until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cautery for chronic apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is chronic and you treat it with water as we have said and your medication does not cause fever in the patient, then cauterize it with four cauteries: above all the temples of the head; and at a cauterium and the middle part of the head, as we have said; and at a cauterium in the nape of the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cautery is done as was said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is better that way; and now it should be treated with water as you have prescribed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On the cautery for forgetfulness caused by phlegm.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	It is necessary to give the patient large doses of decoctions and cleansing pills at the beginning.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then shave the patient's head completely and apply a plaster to the nape of the neck using the one described in the chapter on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And pause at certain points, for that is the method of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to the order which I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And thus if it heals well; but otherwise, at that time perform the three cauterizations on the rear part of his head, which descend from the most superior part of the head to the part nearest the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each cauterization for the thickness of your finger, and then proceed with the next cauterization.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you prefer and the condition allows it, then perform the cauterization in the middle location; and if you want a stronger effect, then cauterize above both horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then proceed to ensure it heals; and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped according to the form given before.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cauterization of parasites and the softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Proceed with the cleansing of the head using scissors and as we have said; then shave the patient's head, and subsequently cauterize it in the middle part of the head, above all the horns, and on the rear part of the head, and with three cauterizations along the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary for the condition of softening the body to do so and the patient can tolerate it, especially when the illness is severe, then cauterize with four cauterizations along the vertebrae of the back, and finally perform one cauterization near the navel area, raising the skin slightly.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	For one side there is treatment that heals, and for this other there is olive oil cauterization.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cautery for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	An epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, one should modify the brain of the patient at the beginning of the treatment and apply the other cure that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is severe and tolerant of the exception of the medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the medicines, then administer sweets and masticatory substances that modify the brain, before which for several days, improve the quality of the food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the patient's head, and subsequently cauterize one area at the middle of the head according to the previous method, and another cauterization at the occiput, and on each side of the head as well.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize as I have mentioned, having paralysis and relaxation of the body on the neck vertebrae and the thoracic vertebrae.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And it should be olive oil cauterization as was previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then use gentle cauterization according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cautery for melancholia.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholia are corrupted humidity and thick phlegm, then cauterize that area with the cauteries which we have mentioned in the case of paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholia is excess declining to melancholia, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink that which purifies the brain as has been mentioned previously in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the patient's head, and then place a well-made poultice over the circle, and then apply that to the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should be seated, and held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a liniment; it is more suitable to use one made from sheep's wool.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that on the fire with moderate heat, as it should be endured when applied.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place that in the middle of the head within the circle, and let it be rubbed in.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this for the patient once a week according to their regimen until they are healed; or if you prefer, cauterize that with small points as needed, but use your hand with a cautery so arranged: this is a type of cautery that moistens the brain with equilibrium.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then apply that lotion infused in wool or in linen cloths.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cauterization of water descending in the belly.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have determined the beginning of the water in the wound by the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then give the sick person to drink that which cleanses the head from all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make him sweat in baths for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of the head; and then cauterize that area with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of water formation in two wounds, or from one side if it is the beginning of water formation in one wound.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	And with the cautery cut open all the veins and arteries that lead to it; and place the cauteries at a distance in the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And guard against bleeding when it is cauterized; and if you see the patient bleeding, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come to the knowledge that is in the extraction of arteries and the treatment to prevent bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized at the neck behind two bones with two cauteries produced in that manner.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the Cauterization of Old Abscesses.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the abscesses of the wounds have become old and persistently remain due to veins and arteries that are evident in the visible part of the head, and it is confirmed that this is cold phlegmatic excess, then cauterize that area with the cautery which we have described in the chapter on the beginning of water accumulation in wounds, and with a cautery at the middle part of the head, and with two cauteries behind the two temples, and with two cauteries behind two bones at the neck.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need an addition, then cauterize that at the entire base of the nail on the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter xiiii.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On Cauterization for Nasal Congestion.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that person with what we have mentioned in the division and they do not benefit from your treatment, then prepare and give the sick person cow's bile to drink for three nights; afterwards, shave their head, and cauterize them with a medium-sized cautery using olive oil.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that person with a small rose-shaped cautery above the two eyebrows, just over the hair, slightly.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to burn that area.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the small rose-shaped cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter .xv.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On Cauterization for Softening the Eyelids.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid is softened due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with this lunar-shaped cautery; and this is the form of it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do so, cauterize that area above the two eyebrows slightly with two cauteries in total, and let them be elongated towards the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Do not press too hard with your tool when cauterizing, but rather to the extent that one third of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	About cauterizing the eyelid when the hairs have turned inward and are touching the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eye have turned inward and are touching the eye, you should cauterize in two ways: either by direct application or as part of a burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you cauterize with fire, instruct the patient to trim their hairs as do those who are clean-shaven, making them longer and even; and if they irritate the area of growth, then wrap the eyes in a bandage so that nothing enters until the hairs grow back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Once they have grown back and are even, then instruct the patient to place their head in your lap, and gently apply a small bandage or patch over the eyelids where the cauterization was done, marking it in the shape of a leaf, with the beginning of the mark near the hairs.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And gently place a piece of cotton in the eye or apply a mucilage of feathers on the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And thus the cauterization should be performed according to this method.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize over the marked figure little by little, in small stages, until the surface of the area shaped like a myrtle leaf is completely burned through.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	A sign of health in this work is that you see the eyelid already contracted and the hair on it raised above the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and wash it for three days, and afterwards place a bandage on it until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of that with herbs until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the hair returns for any reason and the eyelid becomes softened, then perform the cautery again on that area as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hair remains in the eyelid, then cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural position and healed so that the hairs do not touch the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery and burning medicine should be such that you instruct the patient to pluck the hairs until they are long enough and healed, and then make from paper or cloth the shape of a myrtle leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take known soap and one ounce of live lard, or something similar, and mix these ingredients well, and apply it quickly so that it is not rubbed in; then spread this mixture over the paper made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place that on both eyes; and cover the eye with a cloth dipped in cold water, and have the patient's head covered as well.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place your finger on the medicine and press it gently so that the patient feels the burning sensation of the medicine, for this burning is like that of fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And thus, when the biting has stopped, leave the medicine and wash the wound with water; then, once the biting has ceased, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water; and now look to see if the eyelid is raised as it was washed. If so, loosen the constriction with fire or incision, for that is well; but if not, return to the application of the medicine in the place where you have not applied it until it is absorbed into your operation and the eye is constricted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then pause on the cut at the border until the mark of the treatment is eradicated, and then treat that with defined care or another method until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to guard with vigilant diligence that no part of the medicine falls into the eye, and if the eyelid after some days becomes softened due to some cause of the hair root in the eye, then repeat your medicine on that place where the eyelid has become softened, and properly as you did at the beginning, and then wait until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of the leaf of myrtle.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the eyes of people vary in size and smallness, and therefore according to this, your contraction is made.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And the way to practice this art will not be hidden from one who studies in this field.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cautery treatment of a fistula in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with water as we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not confer with your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to place his head either on his hands or on your lap, and let another minister hold his head still in such a way that it is neither too tight nor agitated.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place cotton in the cavity or on the wound surface.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cautery, which has this form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is cone-shaped, like the shape of a reed or an eagle's feather, with one end where the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it can penetrate into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to be as thin as a thread.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But the one that is cone-shaped is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and extract the pus and dry it out.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the putrefaction from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place the cautery, which should be well ignited, on it, and do this gently so that your hand does not shake or disturb the patient, and then place the cautery on the edges of the wound and burn it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of your cauterization it penetrates to the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cauterization once or twice if necessary; and leave it like that for three days, and then place cotton around it with a drying agent applied until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If after ten days it has not healed, then now apply acute corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed, according to what is convenient in its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula which the ancients first described: insert into the location of the fistula and make that opening, then apply to that fissure finely powdered material of which the form is like this: And pour into it one ounce of melted lead; and with your finger carefully press so that there should not be much moisture lest the melted lead reach the flesh around it; and it must be applied over the wound wrapped in egg white or in water, for lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed by what we have said about cauterization and treatment, that is good; but if not, it is now necessary to treat it through the nose and reduce the fistula to follow the course of the nose according to how it will come into its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cauterization of fissures of the teeth.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Fissures often occur in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those fissures with what we have mentioned in the divisions and your treatment is not effective, now use small knife-shaped cautery according to this form that will be shown:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And the sharpness of it should be according to the delicacy of the area.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then apply that hot cautery carefully to those fissures until the cautery reaches the base of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	For the treatment of that which is inside the horn, let it be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On cauterizing a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the uvula or on the palate or in the gums around the teeth there is an abscess and it becomes inflamed, and then it breaks open, and over time it becomes old, and pus flows and a fistula is formed; when you treat that and it does not improve, now it is necessary to cauterize according to the amount received in the fistula, and then place the hot iron in the track of the fistula, and with your hand ensure that the heated iron reaches the base of it, and at the end do this once or twice; and afterwards treat it as we have said for its healing until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the fistula is excised and it heals, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to expose the location and remove the corrupted bone as will be described in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On cauterizing the teeth and on softening the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are damaged, and you treat them with medicines but without success, then place the head of the malath in your mouth, and afterwards ignite the cauterium whose form will be described shortly, placing the quill over the tooth and quickly inserting the cauterium into it with your hand slightly so that the malath feels the heat of the fire at the gum line of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then take your hand, and then repeat the cauteries as many times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and keep doing this for one hour, after which stop it, for the rotten tooth is arrested and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cautery for toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to coldness, or if it is numb or green, and you do not wish to treat it with medicine, then the cautery in such a case is done in two ways: either by means of a cow's horn, or by fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with a horn is that you take a cow's horn and boil it in oil, then take some cotton and wrap it at the tip of the horn. Then immerse it in the boiled horn until it is soaked, and place it quickly on the painful tooth while still warm.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	Then repeat this several times until the effect of the heat reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, soak wool or cotton in the aforementioned horn oil and place it on the painful tooth, then put hot iron on top of that until the heat reaches the source of the pain in the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the cautery with fire is that you attend to the cautery of iron or steel, and it should be in the middle so that the intensity of the heat does not reach the patient's mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	From the fire make the cautery of which I will describe the form, and place it on the tooth until the cautery is rubbed in; and do this several times so that the pain may be alleviated either on that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it happens that by pressure of that cautery the patient fills his mouth with good saliva and holds it for an hour, and then spits it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize as much as you wish according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On Cauterization of Hemorrhoids.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hemorrhoids are full of phlegm and humors that resist digestion by medicines and you wish to digest them gently, then make the cautery in the form described below. It should have two open ends so that the smoke can escape; hold the cautery with one end, and place the ignited part on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the base of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and afterward leave it for three days, and then place it over the cut in saliva until what the fire has burned is alleviated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then care for it with applications and dressings until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the cannula or cautery for this purpose is as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On cauterizing a sore throat and constricting the voice.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the venous humidity comes over the channel of the lung, and especially when it is associated with cold temperament, one should first evacuate the patient at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that area using the root of the galium in the affected location.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to apply the cautery to the galium itself, but only burn a little of its skin.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that area using another cautery near the junction of the neck with the last vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery used should be in the shape of a nail following the previous method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area with what is prescribed until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On cauterizing lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are due to cold and humid conditions, and the patient does not have fever or consumption but rather an old illness, then cauterize that area using two cauteries on the clavicles above the depressions; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples; and let the cauteries be shaped like a nail according to the previous method.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you prefer, you can perform the cauterization with a puncta cautery, whose form is described beforehand in the section on treating ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Let them put in points into the cavities accordingly; and then treat that part with the methods which are described before so that it may be healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And there should be three steps in the cautery which is used on that part: for one session, you can perform three cauterizations according to this method:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cautery of small tumors which are at the tip of the finger.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the tip of the finger is dislocated due to humid and lubricating causes and does not return to its normal position after the dislocation because it is accustomed to being in that state, and then becomes dislocated again during a slight movement as we have testified, you should first reduce the dislocation, and then turn the injured part either on its back or on its side; and then lift the arm, which is at the inner part of the phalanx, above your left hand, if the joint is dislocated towards the inner side.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then use a cautery with two tips; and this is the form of it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the arm until it penetrates to the other side; and the figure of the cautery will come out after four cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and do this carefully according to the amount needed; and this is the form of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And at times it is adjusted according to this method, and thus there are eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then pause after the cautery and apply it with salt for some time, and then ensure that the injured part remains at rest, and do not move the limb much for a while until it is healed.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is to the upper parts and this is done, then cauterize above the muscle with a cautery nail or with pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the moisture is dissipated and the harm is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On Cauterization of the Stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is bleeding in the stomach, fray and scatter moisture inside so that it mixes with its composition and multiplies rapidly within. And if you continue the methods of treatment without confirmation, then it must be that the harm is upon his back ribs, and he should extend his limbs and belongings, and immediately cauterize that area with three cauteries: one cauterization below the feet by the length of a finger, and two cauteries below each side of the central cauterization, so that the figure formed by the cauteries is triangular; and space them such that they are not too close together to avoid infection.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cauterization is equal to two-thirds the thickness of the rib.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the figure of the cauterization should be in this form without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery at the middle part of the stomach in this form; and this should be a cautery in the shape of a circle as follows:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach should be cauterized with points for one who is afraid of this cautery: mark points on the stomach in the quantity you wish with a probe, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and afterward treat that area with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the cautery of an inflamed testicle.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain arises in the testicle due to coldness or humidity or excessive flatulence that has been expelled from its usual condition by excessive evacuation, and if it is not cured with the remedies we have mentioned without causing discomfort, then the patient should lie on his back, and place three cauteries in this manner and quantity over the testicle below the hypochondria, as a person would when lying down.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each cauterization should be according to the thickness of a finger, and the cauteries should be as long as the right arm from the shoulder.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press too hard on the cauteries.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of water that adheres is half the length of the forearm, and it should not be more; and if the patient stands on his feet; and if he does not stand, then have him sit, with his things extended, and raise his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to perform these cauteries with a knife cautery when you possess subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to press too hard during the cautery, and let it adhere along the entire forearm so that the whole body is adhered and reaches into the sinews, as the forearm here is delicate; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the Incision of an Abscess of the Testicle with Caustics.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When you find an inflammation or abscess in the testicle and wish to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the testicle or in the tunica, then if it is in the flesh of the testicle, the patient will complain of heaviness and pain with sharpness.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunica of the testicle, then the pain is intense and often exhausts the efforts of the physicians to treat it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, the patient should be positioned on his back; then approach to feel the location of the abscess; and subsequently apply the cautery that resembles a reed, the form of which was described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that cautery until the entire area is consumed, until it reaches the cicatrix, until it causes scabbing.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area as you would for other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not advisable to use this form of cautery except by one whose study in the art of medicine is prolonged and who has become acquainted with many diseases; but even then, one should attempt this experiment only a few times before relying on this procedure, for caution is best.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the Cauterization of Hydrocele.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancients recommended cauterizing the roots of the arteries for hydrocele to be performed in this manner: take a dry root of an iris plant that is long and thin, about as thick as the finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then you submerge it in oil and heat it over the fire. Then cauterize with a cautery at that place which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck; and just behind two small cauteries, slightly inclined towards the part below the beard, and two cauteries on what inclines between the fifth rib and the tenth, slightly inclined towards the rear parts; and another cautery in the middle location of the feet; and one above the stomach, and three at the rear parts; and one in that place which is between the two shoulders, and two cauteries from each side of the feet behind the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not cover it with your hand at the cautery, but let it be evident on the surface of the skin.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And certain ancient doctors have said that some men use a cautery of iron resembling a ray and burn it there, placing it at the place between the ribs so as to reach the abscess with it and cause it to be purged of pus, as we have said regarding the kidney abscess.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this puncture, there is no fear with the cautery, for if it happens that someone dies immediately or an accident occurs at the place of the fistula where healing is not possible.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cautery of the breast.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the disease of the breast as we have said about treatment in division and do not confine your treatment, then there are three ways to apply cautery, all of which are appropriate. One way is to make three or four linear cauterizations along the length of the breast according to the figure of the cauteries used for the kidney, the figure of which has been described previously.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And let the thickness of each cautery be that of a finger or a little more, and the method of the cautery be the same as we have said for the cauteries of the fundament.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not hold your breath during the cautery; and let the patient lie on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another method of cauterizing, which is to ignite the cautery with both hands, as we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raise the shoulder blade, which is on the side where the patient's left arm lies.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let the elevation with which you raise the shoulder blade be according to the length of the body, so that the cauteries may be made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert both hands, ignite the cautery, and within that insertion penetrate the shoulder blade on the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries are completed.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with one cautery using three fingers.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then allow the cautery to heal so that the patient does not move the arm for too many days, as it is more appropriate than other previous causes in the healing process.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the Cauterization of Hydropics.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterization is not performed on hydropics except in certain specific cases.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the hydropic in the methods of treatment which we have said in the division and do not confer your treatment, now it is necessary that you cauterize with four cauteries around the navel and one caustic on the stomach, and another caustic on the kidney, and another caustic on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and a caustic on the right foot, and another caustic on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cauterization should be proportionate to the thickness of the skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And apply these cauteries with something that will cause bleeding for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the badness of treatment near the cautery with what is necessary so that it adheres to the place for both intentions, and it should be prepared quickly with healing assistance.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be clove-shaped according to its previous form, and the one with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to its previous form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On Cauterization of the Belly and Other Things.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the belly is swollen with apostems and filled with clear water, it is necessary to cauterize the belly above the bone that is between the ring finger and the middle finger, and raise your hand with the cautery without twisting it; then raise your hand and do not return it completely, as the clear water will be expelled.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	Here is the cautery according to this form: And then place two cauteries over both areas, and at each end of each area let a knife-like cautery be made.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cauteries be according to the length of the area: place one below and the other at the middle part of the area; and over each area two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound uncovered for some time because some fluid may seep out of it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then treat it with those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On Cauterization of Abdominal Areas.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdominal area is affected by irritation and moisture, which weaken the functions, namely the digestive and retentive functions, which are in the stomach and intestines, it is treated according to the methods of treatment mentioned earlier without contradiction. Sometimes the patient suffers from a cautery that exhibits harmful properties; at such times, cauterize the area with a large cautery over their stomach as previously described for stomach cauterization, using the circular cautery and four subtle cauteries around the umbilicus, along with a subtle nail-shaped cautery; or use one large cautery over the navel, or two.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if there are excessive moistures and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize over the navel and intestines. Gently apply two cauteries over the stomach and near the inguinal areas, for this is a perfect method of treatment from which you will not deviate in error.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On cauterizing ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When it is in the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or one caused by thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they are treated with the water we have mentioned in the division and do not respond to that treatment, then cauterize them with three cauteries below the spine towards the two small ones which are triangular, and place two of these above the navel.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that their stomach is not being properly lubricated and the food they eat is not being digested, and their face appears inflamed or with an abscess, then cauterize it above the stomach with a large cauterization as previously described; place one cauterization on the liver, and another cauterization on the spleen using a nail-shaped cautery; leave this treatment for some time until they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On cauterizing an abscess near the throat.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you incise an abscess, then use a cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Insert the heated cautery into the incised abscess, and ensure that it reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, for if the abscesses are too severe, then cauterize each of them as we have described, and subsequently treat them with appropriate internal medications until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the navel, it is more beneficial afterwards.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter xxxvi.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are made in the nature behind in the parts down there.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the treatment that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, heal with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Then when someone has a fistula in the nature behind, and it is old, with corrupt pus and moisture, then what is more worthy to do is to try with a subtle probe, and immediately you will know the quantity of the depth of it by the previously mentioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then heat the cautery so that it is like red-hot iron.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then place the heated cautery in this fistula according to the quantity in which the probe entered.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat with the cautery until those corrupted tissues are burned away completely in one instance or two or three, according to the amount needed.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful not to burn the nerve and vein; or if the fistula goes into the body of the bladder or into the intestine, then be cautious in all those areas; and do this only when the fistula is in a fleshy location where you think it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then take care of the area so that it heals.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed, and the substances are expelled from it, and it remains this way for a long time, then you will know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matters are not of the bones, then you know that it is penetrating either into the flesh near the corrupted bone, or one of those causes from which there will be mention in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On Cauterization of the Bones.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When there is pain in the bones due to rubbing or from large windiness, and because of this the patient's condition is worsened, then it is necessary to cauterize that area over the bones with a cautery for each bone, as will be mentioned later.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And you should wait a little while before cauterizing again, so that there will be three lined cauterizations, and thus they will be more beneficial for healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On Cauterization of the Bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is debility and softening of the bladder due to rubbing and humidity such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize in the area slightly above the bladder, where the hair of the pubis begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the sweat glands; and cauterize with one cautery in the lowest part of both sides, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let the cautery be as described in detail.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter xxxix.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On cauterization of the eye.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is blood and moisture in the eye, and because of this it is prohibited to apply anything to it, and its menses are corrupted by it, and the provocation of them is delayed, and pain occurs due to their occurrence, therefore the place should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said regarding the cauterization of the bladder; or two cauteries near the affected area, or two cauteries, one of which should be a cross-shaped cauterization.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On cauterization of the dislocation of the joint.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist mucous membranes are effused in the vicinity of the joint, and this is caused by the displacement of its location, and the sign of it is that the affected part extends beyond the other when they are compared.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is where it hurts.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then you should cauterize the affected area near the joint with two circular cauteries, after you have marked them around the circumference of the part as it is revolved, so that the part falls in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let this cauterization follow the form used in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries, one of which should be large and olive-shaped.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be performed according to the extent of the entire affected area; and then take care to heal what has been treated.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the region of the hip, and its cause is due to friction and humidity, treat it with the water we have mentioned and avoid conferring [with others]. At this time, you should purge the patient of thick humors using stinking pills or artificial pills or similar remedies; then proceed to cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of cauterization in this case is done in two ways: either by using combustible medicines or by using fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It should be done in two known methods: one of which is that you cauterize that area over the region of the hip with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and ensure they have good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cauterization should be the width of the thickness of a finger, and the cauterizations should be olive or large in size.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	But in some cases, the cauterizations should be on top of the middle part over the head of the hip, so there are four cauterizations.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize using the circular method that precedes the form used in the treatment of hip dislocation, ensuring the circle is continuous and burning the entirety of the chain.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cauterization when pain is localized to the hip and does not extend into the body.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if the pain extends into the body, then you should cauterize with two cauteries on the body at the location where the patient feels the pain; and use one cauterization over the navel, four fingers slightly above the abdominal area.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if you use a knife for cautery, and let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the sharpness of the bone.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the disease spreads such that the pain extends to the area near the mentioned parts of the foot, then you should cauterize at the point where the disease has spread, using three points or four or more as needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the disease spreads such that the pain is below the thumb near the joint, then you should cauterize at that point with a knife-cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cauterizations that you do not proceed with the cautery until you burn a nerve or large artery, and by doing so cause harm to the patient or contraction of the disease.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen one and another of those who cauterized over the joint and proceeded with the cauterization, and the bedsores spread inside until the swelling reached the foot, and the sores penetrated and corrupted the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And as a result of a severe abdominal injury, and from that came death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise ones say about the cauterization of both cauteries, for which this is the method: make it resemble a circle of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and let its depth be according to the thickness of a date bone or slightly less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle there should be another one a third of its size; and the space between them should be the quantity of a thumb's width; and those circles should be divided into two parts; and the length of those bars should be one or two thumbs, and make along these edges an appropriately prepared iron border; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Near the fire kindle it within so that sparks fly, and nearby place upon the part of water, the patient lying on his back.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And thus cauterize that part with three circular cauteries at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then let it lie for three days; then apply a bandage to that part and let the wound remain covered for too many days; and then treat that part with medicines until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: Oh, my sons, we have seldom used this kind of cautery out of fear of its consequences, and because few have found those who oversee it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But for the best cauteries to him who endures them, and find the place on him where they are applied.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But the best cauteries with medicines adhere when you make two circles having a perforated armula in which the width of the door should be of iron, and the length of the edges should be the size of two walnuts or something like that.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between each is the quantity of the thickness of a finger; and let them be covered above and below, and let them contain within themselves according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place upon the part of the water the patient lying on his back, and press your hand upon the part of the water; and then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and the quantity of that should be small at first, and increase gradually, and let the patient endure the burning and sticking of it — for he will feel this burning as if from fire — until the burning ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then raise your hand and take the instruments and wipe away the hard water from all the water with soft water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Then let him be on a diet for three days and place him on that border until the blackness of the inflammation subsides, and let him remain like this for some days, during which the ulcer will heal. This is beneficial in treatment.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then care for him with remedies until he is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends to the chest or armpit, apply the poultice as you would for water, similarly to how it is done with water.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hard water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the preparation of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and for one part of it not extinguished, mix them and place them in a new jar, the bottom part of which should be perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into the preparation.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place at the bottom of the jar another inverted jar, and pour over that alkali and live fire soft water in which it rises by one finger, and when you press them with your hand for good compression, and let the jar descend from the sharp water to the lower part of the inverted jar.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then collect all that water and pour it over another live fire and fresh alkali, because at that time it will have great sharpness, which is used in many medical procedures and for cauterizing other limbs, as a means of using fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	Here are the medicines with which cautery is applied widely, such as honey and vinegar mixed with salt and soap, so that they may be compounded.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounts of a man from the ancients the operation and the cure by which he was cured of pain in the sciatic nerve and vein, and magnifies it as being good enough for that, and says there is no need for any other treatment, because he was healed once in this manner as recommended, for such an intricate case easily responded to this method.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be applied from a bag of herbs, and if green herbs are not available, a fresh fig should be used; it should be wrapped in a little cloth and placed on the leg where the pain is, or on the hip, or on the buttock, and then bound.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should remain in place for three hours or for the duration that the patient considers comfortable for the treatment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then place him in a bath, and when his body is warm, move him to the ground, for the pain will cease and he will be healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not necessary to use cautery with these medicines except immediately after the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But Galen says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with a goat's horn, it benefits the patient greatly; and the cautery should be applied in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and at the joints.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take a dry goat's horn and heat it over fire until it becomes charred; and then place it on the wool and let it remain there until it is cooled.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	After this, pour water continuously so that the feeling of the bite reaches the water and the pain subsides.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called cow cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On Cautery for Two-Knee Pain
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain in both knees is caused by excessive reasons such as overuse or impact or excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to these, through the infusion of moist and irritating matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery is not used for any other condition except this one, which is done through the application of irritating matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, after evacuating the harmful substance, use small pills and similar substances to apply them on both knees where the pain is, three lines below according to the latitude of the area. Place at least five cauteries in each line or more, depending on the tolerance of the patient and the strength of the treatment.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And the cautery should be done using pointed cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a central nail-shaped cautery in this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On Cautery for the Beginning of Scrofula.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Sometimes this disease affects small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that it occurs on their neck, with elevation and movement there.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And behind the last thoracic vertebra and the ones that already begin to rise above the others.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize that part with a circular cautery of this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that it should take the cautery over the entire part of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want to, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close together.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And immediately treat the area within it to ensure it heals as we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But be careful not to administer the cautery on inflammation that is caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pains are caused by the friction of humors that are distributed to each part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, it is customary for physicians to call this gout properly.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore, when gout caused by friction is treated with the method of treatment and the pains are not relieved, then apply the cautery to relieve them.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And when you cauterize that area for evacuation around the joint of the foot with these words, you perform the cautery.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let it be an olive-shaped cautery, which has this form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary that a puncture be made on the face of the foot, then perform cautery for the puncture.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains rise into the joints or other junctures, and this happens repeatedly, then cauterize each joint with three cauteries or four from all sides with this olive cauterization.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you must use these cauteries and find them necessary, then cauterize it but do not press too hard with your hand before the cauterization, only around the specificity of the area.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains rise into the joint and the second area, then administer the cauteries which we have mentioned in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the muscles, and it is called sugar, then puncture around the edges as it revolves, puncture in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the said areas, then puncture around the edges over each node and on the base of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains rise near to the joints in the bones or muscles, then cauterize them from all sides with the assistants.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And if you do not evacuate the malady through good regimen and reception of medicines, for if good regimen is followed and phlegm is evacuated with this cautery, it will be healed, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On Cauterization of Fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When you find a rupture in the groin and tell the patient to loosen the belts before the operation, and this is how it begins close by, then you must order the sick person to leave his food on that day and use laxatives so that the opening will happen in his belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And let the patient come to you on his back, and order him to hold his breath until it is ejected or the operation instrument appears.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return to tell him those words and sign where the rupture is on the bone of the pubis, marking the extremity of which seems like half a circle in the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then prepare the cautery, which has this shape:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it becomes hot and sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then reduce the bowel or instrument to its normal position, and then press your hand on the place so that the bowel does not slip.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And you have already placed pillows between the patient’s limbs and let him lie on one pillow, while another is under his thighs and another under his feet, so that he lies on his back.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery on that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and do so until you feel the bone of the pubis in the middle; and repeat this another time if you did not succeed on the first attempt to reach the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe carefully the smell of the bowel during your cautery, so that you do not burn it, lest death or another great harm come to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you hold the cautery, do not touch it with your teeth, do not make your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And let the cautery for children be gentle according to their age and size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And take care of the place where the cautery was applied for three days, until the burn scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the place is sealed and the wound healed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is necessary to restrict the patient's diet according to the length of time required for their treatment, so that the intestines do not protrude due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is appropriate to get up after forty days, administer care properly, and keep that person bedridden for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And limit their work and the consumption of food and drink, and speaking loudly, for when they follow this complete regimen of healing, they will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will describe the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen. At the beginning, if you do not want them to spread, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to the size of it; remove as much as is taken from the cord, as one-third of it. And afterward treat that as we have said, and it will not be adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some earlier practitioners have said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this form, as it is marked with a template:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	This is a paused line that you follow for the latitude in the skin above the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand with a cautery nail, but the first cautery is farther and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the cautery treatment for dislocations.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain in any member due to falling or striking persists for a long time and does not improve with medicine, it is then necessary to treat it with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the size of the cautery for every member should be according to its size and smallness, and its strength and weakness, and the location of the dislocation and the pain in it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If it heals with the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then apply the cautery again. For it is customary for such pains to be punctured in a member near where they are located, so you must achieve this with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the cautery treatment for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some cases of leprosy are greatly helped by cautery, but rarely when the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so when you wish to cauterize that patient, consider whether the leprosy is commencing and can be cured with what we have discussed in the division and do not delay. If you fear that the corruption will encompass the entire body of the patient and all its composition, then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one at the middle part of the head, and another above it near the forehead; two on both horns; and one behind, either on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And last of all your cautery a little inside so as to press into the bone a small depression, and thereby displace the scabs, so that the exhalation of thick vapors may be alleviated; and cauterize over the mucus as is necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the body and is clearly manifested, then you should cauterize in those places with those cauteries which we have mentioned at the beginning; and cauterize one on the tip of the nose, two on each cheek, two on the vertebrae of the neck, six on the back vertebrae, one large one near the buttocks, one on the buttock itself, two on each thigh, one on each shin, two on each joint, and one on each finger joint, two on each instep, and two on each muscle, and two on the soles of the feet; cauterize in all the joints of the fingers and toes, and on each heel of their feet, and on the hollows of their feet.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves which lie above the heel so as not to burn them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And in some cases it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the little finger and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as others would, because the body is already numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is appropriate that the cauteries be large or small according to the members and joints as required by the nature of the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	For the treatment of cautery, use flour of oats mixed with honey. And for the other cure, let it be made healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On cauterization for fainting.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a limb is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let the heat of the cautery enter slightly into the depth of the skin.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And subsequently treat that area with an ointment so that it may heal.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes fainting is cauterized in certain places that are near the ribs and to the chest and to the vertebrae of the back, and along the course of the nerves which move that limb, and thus the numbness is alleviated.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not proceed beyond this unless one is wise in the anatomy of limbs and the course of nerves throughout the body that move them.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On cauterization of ulcers that become infected.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When an old ulcer does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you should cauterize it with a cautery slightly, according to the quantity and specificity of the depth of the skin, until the whiteness and color of it are alleviated, and its color changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	For the treatment, mix flour of wheat and lentils with rose oil and arnica leaves, and add pigeon blood or swallow blood, taking an equal part of each and thoroughly mixing them together. Then apply a cloth soaked in this mixture to the affected area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 10
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the cautery treatment for cancer.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery as it appears.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	The wise ones say that it should be cauterized with the deepest cautery in the middle area; but I have not seen this done, for I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have observed this happening several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is safer to cauterize around it in a circular manner as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 11
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the cautery treatment for tumors.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When a tumor is delayed in maturation due to excess moisture in that area, or because of the patient's condition, being old and weak, with little blood, or due to time, and you want to hasten its maturation; then cauterize around it with many small punctures. After this, leave it be, as it will hasten towards maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to perforate it with a cautery, then choose the appropriate cautery for this purpose. Place that cautery in the center of the tumor until it penetrates the tissue.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you apply cautery in that place where there is pus, so that the arm may be relieved; and then treat that part which needs to be healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LII.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the Cauterization with Corrosive Substances.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	A corrosive is a wandering corruption in the limb, which eats away just as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, when you see that corrosive in a place where it can be treated with fire, then you ignite cauterizations with small and large branding irons as is appropriate in the place where the corrosive is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize it thoroughly so that you eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause for it to remain.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then dress it for three days, and pause on the cauterized areas three times a day with oil mixed so that all scars are eradicated and all corruption is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat it with substances that promote flesh growth.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days you see that the flesh grows healthy with no corruption, it is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains in the corrupted areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And some corrosives are treated with sharp medicine, for that is the method in place of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But cautery with fire is more quickly effective.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already mentioned the treatment with sharp medicine in the division, and therefore use that when you find it appropriate for the condition.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the cautery of nails and other similar parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Often in the parts below the foot there is a malady called "claw," which is caused by thick and hard flesh that deforms the foot; and this condition can be treated by cautery in two ways, namely fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	The fire cautery is performed by heating the cautery tool, which should be concave in shape and similar to a half-circle, made of iron according to the size that fits around the entire affected area, and it should have fine edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place the heated cautery on the affected nail, and immediately rotate your hand with the cautery around the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave it for three days until it begins to scab over.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a plaster made of crushed wild mullein and salt to it, and leave the plaster on for one night, for this will eradicate it from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a generative flesh ointment until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and often occurs on the surface of the body, particularly on the palms and feet, then you should administer hot water cautery to them. This is done by taking a small tube made of earthenware or iron or half-circle in shape, and place it over the affected nail; then pour a small amount of hot water into the tube and hold it with your hand, rotating it thoroughly so that the edge of the tube touches the root of the nail; as the hot water penetrates to the base of the nail, wait for the malady to be slightly burned by the hot water for about an hour, then remove it, for the nail along with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus place one part close to the other until you cover all of them as they naturally should be in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And bring close the care of those abscesses when the roots of the nails are removed with the remedies that cause flesh to grow.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the cautery for tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you find a tremor due to irritation of the nerves or from fever causing irritation, or from some similar cause, it is then that you should cauterize it with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra one cauterization; and at the feet of him, and above his stomach, a cauterization in the shape of an olive.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor of him subsides and hastens the recovery from the sickly condition caused by irritation.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LIV.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cautery for accidental injuries to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body there appear accidental swellings and pus-filled wounds that are formed from thick, corrupted matter; therefore, it is necessary at the beginning when they appear, to cauterize over the entire head of the fistula with a fine cautery made of myrtle wood, the tip of which is extended over fire; or with the long edge of erestologia; or with a lens-shaped cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize immediately at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and if not done so, the excess that causes them is disrupted, and they heal from those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it must be done close to evacuation rather than phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On cauterization of blood flow due to accidental cutting of an artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	If the flow of blood from an artery that has been cut is due to a plague that occurred before, or due to the beginning of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and similar cases, then it is difficult to remedy that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	When such an incident occurs, immediately place your thumb on the opening of the artery, and press over it until the bleeding stops and no more blood escapes.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place the olive-coated cauteries, both small and large, in the fire for a number of times until they are ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one of those cauteries, either small or large depending on the location and condition in which the artery is ruptured, and apply it quickly after you have stopped the bleeding with your thumb, so that the blood flow is sealed and restricted.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove your thumb and apply the cautery, then take another cautery immediately from those that are prepared in the fire, and continue doing this one after another until the bleeding is stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerve that is here, and do not cause any other harm.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the blood at that moment, especially if the artery is large, unless one does one of four things: either use cauterization as we have described, or perform an extraction because when it is extracted, the extremities are burned and the blood is constricted, or bind it with a strong ligature or apply medicines whose virtue is to restrict the blood; and strengthen them with a pillow and proper constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	And let him who administers proper restraint with the bandage and constriction with cloths or by positioning burning substances and similar items not hurry but act slowly.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	And if anyone attempts this and the physician is not present nor are medicines available, then open with care using the index finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction inside so that the blood stops from flowing from the main part of the wound, and over the artery let the finger not be moved; and above the artery sprinkle it with cold water to make the blood congeal and thicken; and then proceed with cauterization or necessary medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On incisions and punctures and ventouses and phlebotomy and wounds and their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already discussed in the first chapter all maladies in which cautery with fire is appropriate and with burning medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for the forms of cauterization; and I have arranged the chapters on the supremacy of the head among the parts.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	In this procedure in this chapter by that method, so that the patient may praise God for it, because of what he will ask for.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, listen, son, and learn that in this chapter it is by means of fear what was in the first chapter about cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for this reason, it is necessary to be in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many times evacuation of what is harmful to life depends on the puncture of the vein or incision over the abscess or opening of an exit or purification of the ulcer or extraction of a splinter or cutting of a stone and similar procedures.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And with all of those things, accompany fear and trembling, and in the worst case of their severity, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this should not fall upon you for which there is blame, because some cases depend on your methods of treating people with many kinds of illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And among them are some who become angry about their illness and are close to death because of the vehemence of what they find in their illness, and due to the length of their illness, and this illness brings fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among them is one who gives you all his possessions and says, "I hope for health from you," while his illness is deadly.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore, you must not consent to one who comes to you with this attitude; and your caution should be greater than your greed and rapacity; and do not presume any reason about it unless based on certain knowledge that confirms what is before you, and which through experience proves worthy.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	For the treatment of all your patients, make predictions and indications about which one's health can be restored, for in that is your help towards acquiring fame and reputation, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, children, may God inspire your sound understanding and not take from you direction and protection, for these are in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have arranged this chapter distinctly by chapters as it follows the chapter on cauterization, from the treatment of the head down to the feet, so that what you seek and of which you have need may be clear to you.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this disease often affects children shortly after birth when the nurse presses too hard on the child's head.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it happens for hidden causes that are not understood.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have seen this disease only in children; and in all those whom I treated, death followed, and thus it seemed to me that there was no remedy for them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I saw a child whose head was filled with water, and his head was so enlarged that he could not move because of the size of his head, and the moisture increased to such an extent that it caused death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture either accumulates between the membranes and the bone, or it accumulates below the bone on the brain.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For when the operation is to be performed and the moisture lies between the bone and the abscess but is only slight, it is necessary that you cut through the middle of the head into a fissure in its length, and let this fissure run for two fingers' breadth where the moisture flows, and this is the shape of the spatum:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then there are two such fissures made in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, the sign of this is that you see the sutures of the head swollen on all sides and the fluid is pressed out when you press it with your hand at the surface but not deep inside and it does not return immediately.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	It is necessary that you cut through the middle of the head into three such fissures in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	and then extract all the moisture; and then close the fissures with strips and bandages; and then apply ointment made of oil and wine on top from the fifth day, and then loosen the binding and treat the wound with tinctures and powders, and dress the head evenly; and eat only dry food with little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which you must consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of fluid, for sometimes it is greater at the occiput, or in front, or on the right side, or on the left; and therefore pay attention to the incision where the abscess appears and the swelling of the fluid, and do this as best suits you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery, and beware of excessive bleeding and let the illness not persist due to that flow of blood and evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On cutting the arteries near the ears, called hilasseysse.
Capitol segon.	Chapter second.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When I treat certain wounds or ulcers in the hands or feet, and if it is old, and medication does not help in its cure, then the last resort is to begin with these two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore, when you want to cut those arteries that the patient exposes by shaving their head, and then rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then secure the patient's neck with a cloth; and then observe where the pulse is; and the locations of each near the places below the ears, and in some people they are hidden.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then place your thumb on the artery, and then cut each one with a sharp scalpel, cutting deeply enough to reach the bone, and do this according to the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the scalpel below the artery and cut it where the incisions are made above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, because when an artery is cut, blood spurts out in a pulsating manner, which comes out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear clearly, then measure from the ear a distance of three fingers, and then place your thumb there, and cut into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And the amount of blood to be let is about one uncie (ounce), and it should flow freely but not too much, and all this depends on the quantity that appears from the patient's strength and the fullness of the artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Now consider the wound, and if there remains any cause of swelling on the bone, then cleanse it with water so that an abscess does not form from cauterizing.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Now strengthen the wound with lint and cloths of linen, and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When it happens that some acute illness or sharp fever occurs due to excessive moisture and heat in the veins of the temples, or if it is a chronic condition similar to these, and treatment with medicinal methods does not provide relief, then we resort to the method of extracting arteries in the temples, or cauterizing them as has been shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction of these is that the patient shaves the hair that is in the temples; and understand the artery that appears in the temple as it is shown to you by its pulse, and it remains hidden except in a few people due to the intensity of friction.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then tie the patient's head with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And now you take the spatula, which has this form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you carefully cut the skin with that tool with ease until you reach the artery; and then proceed to extract it in a manner that allows you to remove it from the muscle and reveal the arteries beneath layer by layer.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is fine, now wrap it at the joint, and then cut off a part according to the amount by which its extremities are lengthened and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, for if they were not thus cut, the blood would not rise completely.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then remove one ounce of blood within three days.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, now make sure to tie it in two places with very strong thread or cords and do not allow it to putrefy before the consolidation of the wound, or else there will be a flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut away the excess that is between two ligatures; do this at that hour or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery near the bone or use a knife-shaped cautery after the extremities have been cut, and this will serve as a substitute for that procedure.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to perform this work if the patient has a fever or is of a heated complexion; for cautery helps eliminate residual moisture, and thus it is better in such cases.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And after the extraction of the arteries, it is necessary to fill the place with dried meat, and place it on a prepared powder, and then treat it with dry medicines that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if at another time during your work there is a flow of blood from the artery, now you must stop that blood, either with a cautery or by filling the place with dried meat, and press firmly until the blood is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any of those causes is not present for you, then wait until the time has passed during which the blood must coagulate, and apply to the place with water of great coldness until the sharpness subsides, and bind it as seems fitting.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is quicker in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives, after you have marked the two places with thread, and then place some ignited material until it reaches the bone and cuts the vein into two places, so that it stretches what is between its extremities, since they are not consolidated by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the sharpness of both knives be examples.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if you make it with less sharpness than two knives, it is better, for if it is as sharp as two knives, it approaches each roughness and does not cut the flesh quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire is kept in them and the flesh is quickly severed.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all works and quicker.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space between the two knives be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of sharp and acidic tears from the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are acidic tears, and it is the condition of those veins which lie above the head outside, and you do not find any cause for the treatment of medicine in that, and often the face of the patient turns red and feels as if there were a crawling sensation on the forehead, and the eyes from this become weakened, producing so much moisture that even the hair around them is noticeable, and the eyelids are scorched by the sharpness of the tears. The ancient masters used to treat these conditions in such an operation, and did not name that treatment for delay.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the barber to shave the hair on which are in the forehead area, and immediately incise three furrows equally distant according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two digits: one incision should be equally distant at the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a bit from the movement of the lids which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And guard against the beginning of the arteries which are on both sides, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between each incision is the quantity of three digits adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloth to press against the areas where you dry the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the probe with two sharp points, which has this form for the incision as follows:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the first incision to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise along that entire ridge which is between two incisions on the bone, and then perform this incision midway between the first and second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then spread this probe and insert into the first incision another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And pause the sharp side on the flesh adjacent to the ridge, and the blunt side within the bone, and proceed with it until you reach the middle incision, and dissect all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May the incision be continued until the fluid appears at the root of the wound, and then place that fluid in the deeper part of the incision.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when pus flows in equal quantity with the blood, express the places from which the clotted blood has been gathered.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply pieces of fresh leather to each incision, and place powder mixed with vinegar, oil, and sour grape juice on them, and use plasters so that an abscess does not form by cauterization.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, loosen the bandage and administer a generous infusion of hot water or decoction, and then treat it with basilicon ointment and rose oil until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the cure of tumors by catharsis and for descending humors from the internal parts of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is a sudden and continuous need for catharsis in some cases, and the humors of the patient are depleted and small, and when paying attention to them shows debility, and the eyelids are ulcerated with hair loss, and at the temples there is acute pain and severe emaciation, then you should know from these symptoms that the matters and catharsis do not come except from veins originating in the internal parts.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for these cases is this: Command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in that area at its midpoint, a little over one finger's width (starting from the temple on the left side towards the right temple; and let the incision be through the bone; extend your hand beyond the temples which are hard due to mastication), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth and then fill between the two lips of the fissure with hair or pieces of linen.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then sprinkle above the wound with powder mixed in oil so that it does not cause an abscess from cauterization.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you loosen this and see that the abscess has already diminished, then it is necessary to clean the bone starting from where the new flesh begins, and afterwards treat it with a drying regimen that will make the flesh grow, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colocynth and mix them, and from these materials prepare a plaster which should be applied to these areas where the new flesh is growing.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the treatment of what affects the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Every cause that affects the ears is one of four types: it may be a mineral stone or a substance similar to stone, such as iron or lead; it may be from plants, such as thorns or beans; it may be fluid-like, such as water and sour wine and things similar to them; or it may come from an animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And so when a stone or any similar cause that does not adhere to the ear or mucous membrane enters the ear, place the ear towards the sun, and if you see the stone, then drip in some oil of violets or sesame into it, and afterwards administer its extraction with certain conditions, and make them sneeze by inducing a sneezing fit, and plug the nose before the onset of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place around the circumference of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear upwards to the sides, as movement for several days is advisable with these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not removed, then proceed with the extraction using the instrument called gesti epicicarios, which is subtle and of this form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forcibly removed with the instrument, that is good; but if not, then proceed with the extraction using an even more subtle variation of the instrument after a few modifications.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore, if it is not forcibly removed with that, then make a cannula of reed and insert the end of the cannula into the ear canal, and secure around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that nothing else enters except the cannula.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract with the small tool using strong traction, as described in the manner we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not forcibly removed in this manner, then take a small piece of linen or a feather that birds are caught with, attach it to the end of a thread, and then wrap it carefully around the object.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the ear canal with ease, and then dry the ear of its humidity.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore, if it is not forcibly removed by all the means we have recounted, then you must consider cutting it before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of cutting it is that you begin by cauterizing the malady of the vein and extract the blood according to the manner appropriate for it, and then make a cut between your fingers and turn the ear upwards, and create a small incision at the edge of the ear in the place most pressed.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the crack is of a crescent shape and reaches to the stone, and the stone found, remove that with appropriate instruments; and then promptly close the crack at that time with speed, and treat it until it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause lying in the ear is one of the gristle that grows and becomes inflamed, then administer the treatment and the extraction of it; but if you do not obey this instruction, at that time take a fine probe according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer the removal of that gristle which is lodged in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not proceed with this when you think that it has already become moistened by the vapor of the ear, and pause at various times, and then extract it in small pieces or with delicate movements, or as we have said, for the extraction is facilitated.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water that has entered the ear, it is good for the patient to use sneezing with cold at the beginning, and fill his own ear with some old cotton, and keep it over the ear where the water is, and if this expels it, well; but if not, then take small dry stones and lemons according to the length of a finger, and heat those in the fire for a little while, and let the patient insert one of them into the canal of his ear and jump on that side with a stone hitting the stone inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Then do not stop this with stones until all the water is expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And the water will be expelled in this way that you take paper or cotton, and put one end of it into the ear and extend the other end over fire until most of it is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	For this operation, insert another tube and pour water into it so many times that all the water comes out, and stretch that part with the tube as was said above about the stone extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of foreign bodies entering that ear, if it is a small object, proceed and treat it similarly as we have said in the division; but if it is a large object which causes pain to the patient, then manage the extraction by hand and incisions, and the cause of this is more serious than all other causes that fall into the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it with the water as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and your treatment does not provide relief, then it is necessary for you to expose the ear to the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore, if there appears any cause for the worms, then extract it by hand or with fine incisions; but if no cause appears, then take a tube that is narrow below and wide above, which has this shape:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the narrow end into the ear according to the quantity that will suffice for the patient's condition; then suck with a strong suction, and do this many times until all the worms are removed.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if you do not adhere to this method, then plug and seal around the tube with wax as we have said; then administer distillations that have already been proven effective in treating worms, and you will find these described in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And use the application with which you pour medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, which has this shape:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	If you use a cup of silver or tin, make it tight, in which there is a small hole, and cover it above.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus it should be as they push in what is in the curvature of the cannula here where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the syringe and wrap its tip neatly with cloth, and then pour oil into the curvature of the ear, or juice from some herb, or any of these medicines in the cannula — and that is in the ear —, and then insert the syringe covered with cloth above and press it gently so that the oil is expelled into the curvature of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is to be infused into the ear should be slightly warmed over fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the substance you will distill into the ear is not too strong, for medicines for the ear do not tolerate that.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear blockages.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes infants are born with their mothers' wombs unruptured, and this also happens in some adults, where there is a blockage in the ear canal due to an infection or flesh growing there; and this obstruction sometimes occurs at the entrance of the ear canal, which cannot be seen, and sometimes it is in the parts outside.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And the one that occurs at the entrance of the ear canal, which cannot be seen, is among the most difficult conditions to treat.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that which you seek the vein, have the patient place his ear to the sun and observe it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see swelling there, open it with a fine probe, which has the shape of this:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the tip of it where there is a small width, of which one part is sharp and the other is not; and the probe has two sides so as not to hurt the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the swelling is due to hidden flesh in the ear or in its canal, then use fine forceps and cut away the vein easily until all the flesh is excised.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the swelling is in front of the ear, then take a thin needle and heat it over fire for a moment, and then put it into the ear canal.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you have felt a swelling with what the patient perceives as ease, due to hearing difficulties, apply pressure to it gently; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place in the ear a piece of cloth according to the quantity of the trauma that you have wrapped in Egyptian lint; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some ointment and apply it inside the ear, sprinkle some finely powdered medicine over it, and use it; and if you see the ear already becoming inflamed, then you should remove that ointment and replace it with another one wrapped in wax mixed with olive oil until the inflammation subsides; and afterwards treat it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If bleeding occurs, immediately dip a sponge or cloth in cold water, wring it out and apply it to the ear, and use the other treatment described in the chapter on constriction to stop the flow of blood, which is described in the section on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of inflammation that occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Inflammation that affects the eyelids sometimes occurs with moisture, and at other times it is dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you should have those herbs that are suitable for this condition, and finely crush them to powder, then apply it to the affected areas as needed.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	However, if pain and bleeding occur, you should cauterize the area with a fine cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is when it stops the recurring inscriptions and spots from returning whenever their causes remain; and when cauterized with fire, those causes are burned away and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for severe inflammation that occurs in the eyelids.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Often, certain causes appear on the eyelids that are similar to severe inflammation in their intensity and hardness, and thus they are called severe.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an aggregation of thick moisture in the eyelid, both above and below.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the procedure is that you should now consider whether the inflammation has spread across the entire eyelid from where it first appeared; and if so, the cause of it is light.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then place a bandage over the fracture along its length, and carefully extend it all around so that it holds securely, and then suspend the limb with it and cover it up.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the beginning of the condition is not apparent and pus penetrates the eyelid in small amounts, then there is no need to treat it for any specific cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then sew it up with stitches; and take care of it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, then no harm will come from it as the warmth of the body will heal it and it will become covered with new flesh.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is decreasing inside the eyelid, then gently press on its surface, thereby allowing the eyelid to heal and suspend the swelling with a bandage, so that you do not need to treat it for any initial cause, and apply pressure from all sides, and if the eyelid extends due to inflammation, there is no need to treat it for any specific cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And then at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with something that promotes healing until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the treatment around the eye above the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath is gray and originates in the layers of the eyelid above, and it occurs more frequently in children, worsening their wounds and causing them catarrh when they are sick; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears accumulate for them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you will see them lying on their faces all the time, and they sleep on their faces; and thus the eyelids of their eyes are moistened, which has covered inflammation, and the blackness of the pupil is apparent in the eye; and that when you press the place with your fingers, you feel hardness within them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And there is a method of operation in the case where the patient places his head in your lap, and immediately place a cloth between him and you and make a circle according to the quantity which contains arthernach on all sides, and then place that over it and press with your fingers so that hardness aggregates at the center of the circle, and then apply moisture with a spatula incidentally along the fissure by latitude, and the fissure should not be larger than the one made in phlebotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the incision be careful that you cut completely through to the hardness, for in major dissections the hardness will proceed out by a fissure according to the shape of white fat.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract that which you have wrapped in cloths between your fingers at the parts outward and roll it between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to press on the fissure so that with the spatula you do not reach the eye and damage it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if no fat appears at the beginning of the fissure, but you press on the fissure gently until fat begins to come out; and then extract that as we have said; and then immerse cloths in water and vinegar and place them over the area and dry those with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And thus a poultice of salt is placed over it to stop what remains of that moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And attend to it so that it may be healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an abscess occurs in that place, then treat it with soft plasters so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On the methods of examining the wound.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When fine hairs grow among the natural eyelashes and these become old, they cause discomfort to the eye and can lead to various ailments such as frequent tears and swelling of the eyelids, which may result in damage to the eye, a condition known as examining or treating the eye. This is done in four ways: either by cauterizing with fire; or using sharp medicine as previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization; or performing examination through incision and suturing; or using canulas, as I will describe.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so it is necessary to place the patient's head in your lap; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it turns well, that is good; but if not, insert a needle into the part where pus has formed below the eyelid, and let the needle penetrate to the center above, near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs grow, near the hairs, and draw out the pus towards the edges with the eyelid, and turn it back to its place.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Then proceed to the inner part of the eyelid below the fine hairs by incising along the course of the larger tear duct into the smaller tear duct; and then extract the pus and place small particles of cotton or cloth beneath the eyelid, and subsequently cover the eyelid with a pad, and it should resemble the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it should be made according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, since this varies in people, because there are those for whom you must cut a large amount from the eyelid according to the amount by which the eyelid is relaxed.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then place the spatum on the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the larger tear duct into the smaller tear duct.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fissure is near the natural hairs just as it is the thickness of a king's hair.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the ounce in one of the two angles of the neck, and then excoriate that entire area, and then apply the incision to both lips with gum or fine wool fleece, and wipe away the blood, and make adhere what you consider superfluous of the plasters over two eyebrows with some sticky causes if you want to do this, and otherwise, do not worry.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then remove the stitches from the plasters after three or four days, and then take care of it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, remove the dressing without stitches, and care for it with something that dries and constricts, since the eyelid is elevated due to the sealing of the wound and the addition of lint; but stitching is better. And thus this is what the ancients recommended.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, in it there should be concern about the injury, and it is of good practice, and not out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method in dressing, which is to mark on the eyelid a shape like a myrtle leaf, and then elevate the eyelid by three inches separated and gathered according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to do this, hold the hooks, and if that is unfeasible, take a needle with thread and place that in the middle of the figure, and insert one suture near the larger lacrimal bone, and another suture near the smaller lacrimal bone, and adjust between the aforementioned sutures so that they are equal, and then lift your hand equally to elevate the entire structure on which you have marked as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound with the suture, and treat it so that it may heal.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	但如果您的脓肿是由您的切口或裂口引起的，用蜡和类似物封闭它，并进行包扎。
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	并且在某些情况下，当眼睑的毛发方向改变时，你应该按照我们所说的切口处理；但是缝合则更需要技巧。
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	使用竹子进行操作应按照以下形式进行：
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	你应该将眼睑翻转过来，并按照我所述的方式切割该区域；然后用艺术手法制作两根竹子或两根细木条，其长度应与眼睑的长度相同，宽度则应小于眼球的直径。
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	当你已经在各部分的末端切开，并且在那里放置了线的时候。
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	然后，将它们小心地放在眼睑上多余的组织上，并用强力绷带固定竹子的各个部分，让它放置几天，因为通过紧固，多余的部分会死亡并被移除，伤口会在适当的时候愈合。
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is delayed, cut through the tendons at the joints, and then treat the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when it is hardened, the eyelid is raised and the hairs are not punctured.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the shape of two canes that you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and there should be the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On raising hairs with needles in the eye when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are unnatural, hard and rough and sting the eyes, then the operation is that you take a fine needle and place it in some soft wax, and adjust the extremities of it gently.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the hairs should be of the quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you attach another fine hair below it briefly, and adjust the ends of that one as you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the mirror on your head in the light, and let it be near the sun so that your work is visible, for it is a delicate and precise operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the adjusted hair that needs to be removed, and make it penetrate into the eyelid quickly until you extract it from above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair out from above and insert another one, and let there be one or two or three hairs and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Take your scissors and trim the hair from around the eyelid, leaving the natural hair untouched.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If the area is shaved and the hair is not removed, shave around it with a razor that you have prepared for this purpose, so that the hair in the surrounding area is also removed.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	Examine the condition of the eye after shaving and using the razor, and then bandage it, leaving the stitches in place for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and grows from healthy tissue.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the hair is too short, then attach a longer hair from the natural hairs to it, or leave it so that it grows out over some space, and then lift it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of ulcers that occur on the upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When an ulcer appears on the eye and causes contraction of the eyelid when it is closed, either to the right or left side, due to poor healing of wounds, cuts, or cauterizations, it is called leporine. This ulcer may be either natural or accidental, caused by improper healing of wounds, cuts, or cauterizations, or similar malpractice.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method for the procedure is that you should cut open that contraction and separate its edges, then place between them a piece of linen cloth, and secure it there until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	You should not use treatments that dry out or constrict the ulcer, as using such methods will cause the ulcer to return worse than before and never heal properly.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in the preparation of causes that I soften thus as fenugreek, and boil with water in which coix grass and its seed have been steeped or juice of it, which is liquefied with some of the oils, and immerse therein the wound, and cure with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you pierce through every part that is not consolidated according to the form at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have mentioned is nothing but a correction of something that does not return to its original form as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of ehacrati which is performed on the lower eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This ehacrati which is made on the lower eyelid, which is properly called ehacrati; and it can be either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	The accidental one is caused by plague or by cutting or by cautery or by other similar means.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation is that you take a needle with which to make a double thread, and place it in the flesh, and pass it from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then stretch the flesh in the parts above with the needle and cut along it with a wide spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if the eyelid then returns to its proper shape as needed, it is good; but if not, take a rod and place it in the incision, and use that to convert the eyelid, and close the two openings on the side of the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	Let the extremities of the two cracks at the two corners of the incision, which you have made to meet, form an angle when they come together such that a figure is formed by them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And above this, raise the flesh by the amount equal to the width of the eyelid below, which covers the eyeball.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then join the separated parts and stitch them together with a thread of wool; and then treat them as we have said with softening medicines and plasters until they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if it becomes necessary to incise along a crack, seam, or cauterization, then you should make an incision in a straight line above the eyelashes as was previously described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then place the plaster between two layers as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the speech on the treatment of incisions when they are above or below, it should follow the operation as it is prepared according to the form of the incision, and that varies in many ways.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled practitioners always prepare in every possible way to restore the figure to its natural form or close to it, and that according to the convenience of the operation and the instruments in the most favorable positions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in certain people so that the eyelid is solidified above the white of the eye, and its flexibility of movement and natural functions are restricted, then you should introduce a retractor below the eyelid, and elevate it with it, or extend it to the root.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And when you incise the adhesion with a fine spatula, which should not be sharp so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remove the spatula without pressing the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be such that it separates the adhesion with ease until the eyelid is returned to its natural form and all of the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put salt water in which you wash the eye; or distill it with rose water dissolved in the water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a cloth, and place on the eye a linen infused in egg white, and after the third day use healing substances until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the incision of the nail and of the flesh prominence of the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the nail is of two kinds, either it is nervous, and resembles a hard but subtle ciphac; or it is non-nervous, resembling white frozen humidity, which when touched with an instrument takes hold at its root and is severed without the instrument being inserted into it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both kinds do not begin except at the major lacrimal gland, gradually covering the eye and prohibiting light and the movement of the eyelid.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	Here is the translation:
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Take a needle and attach to it a hair from a horse or ox or cow, or something similar, or strong thread, and gradually double the tip of the needle little by little and place this in the middle of the nail, and penetrate with the needle, and bind the nail with thread; and extend this above the parts, and shave off the hair from the side of the nail where it is close to the quick.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you should follow that with the hair into the back of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you should incise the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small forceps, and allow the tissue of the tear duct to heal naturally so that by incising it, there does not result a continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail is raised with heat or thread, as we have said, and then shaved off with a lion-shaped spatula of which this is the form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful not to touch the corneal tissue with the spatula so that it does not become torn, and that the quick is not perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	After the incision, place a small amount of powdered salt or finely made cerement in it, and leave that for another day; and then treat it with what is necessary until it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not tender and you cannot place the needle there, nor is it fixed in that spot, then this kind of nail is treated with medications, and it heals as I have described and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise that, then you open the wound of the abscess and take a fine, sharp spatula in the shape as follows:
am subtilitat.	of subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you find that it is rarefied and condensed and mixed with the aforementioned raisin wine or with white rose petals or salted verjuice, then strain the mixture through a cloth overnight.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And proceed with the operation until everything that needs to be removed is out, unless the opposite side has an abscess, in which case you should leave it for now and treat the initial abscess until it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then proceed with your operation on that side until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	If the prominence of the lacrimal flesh causes great discomfort and needs to be cut, do it in moderation; make an incision but do not extend it so far as to interfere with the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then apply white rose petals and raisin wine to the lacrimal area until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On Incision of Boils and What Is Born of Tight Flesh in the Body.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	In some cases on the eyes of certain individuals, white flesh is born and it spreads until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids, making them hard to open, and it appears like the texture of a lattice.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The procedure for this is that the patient lies down with their head in your lap; then open the eyes of the affected area and remove all that flesh in small pieces as needed, using forceps or a needle; then make an incision on the flesh at the beginning until it is completely removed with scissors, and be careful not to damage the eye during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And so let the incision be made with the knife about which we have spoken in connection with the incision of the nail, or with small scissors with which hair is clipped according to how it will come near this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	And when the incision is complete and all that flesh has been scraped away, then fill the wound with powdered salt or sprinkle it with red powder similar to corrosive medicines, and place over the wound a cloth dipped in albumen until it is secure from abscess.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any cause for concern remains and the patient’s blood is weak, and you fear an abscess, then leave the wound and treat that abscess with whatever cures that abscess, and afterward proceed with this operation when it is healed, and similarly do in the case of flesh that becomes inflamed in a wound of this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But you must be careful to keep all healing of the wound from infection by natural or accidental means, use tools with care, and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that the member can withstand the operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of pus in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Pus that comes from red veins which are covered over the wound and prohibits its appearance on the surface, and heals the wound over several days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	At the beginning, it is necessary for you to consider whether the wound in which there is pus is strong and if there is no other illness but pus, then you should collect that pus.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to place his head in your lap, and immediately suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your discretion; and let that ounce be of subtle duplication according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or if two ounces gradually in one course according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And immediately let those veins be collected with subtle force, with subtlety, and wipe the blood hour by hour until you see those veins become smooth and turn.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful that you do not lead the hand to the extremities of the skin; and if your operation in the morning before the sun, and be firm in your operation so as not to incise anything but those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed it, then you apply on the wound a green or red ointment due to its acidity to dissolve what is hardened by the blood.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible for you to do this at that time, then bandage everything with something that alleviates the pain, and leave him for several days until the pain subsides and he is safe from abscess.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat on him according to the same method until he is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of nasal fractures.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat fractures with cauterization or with acute burning medicine as described in the narrative and they have not healed, then do not allow infection to develop; instead, incise over the abscess when it has matured, and remove all the moisture that is within it until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone and tissue are exposed and corruption or blackening is seen, then you should apply a tool of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called the rough head, and it is made of iron, and its head is round just like a sphere which is punctuated with small points (as shown in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place it on the corrupted part of the bone, and then rotate it between your fingers, and press gently with your hand until you know that the corruption is scraped off.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And do this several times, and then treat the area with astringent and drying agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	When the area is consolidated and good flesh has grown, and the pus has ceased and remains absent for forty days, and there is no renewal of it and no abscess forms and no accident occurs, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then the only recourse is to reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you uncover the bone with a probe or sharp instrument, and when the bone is exposed, then you apply traction in this manner:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the end of the instrument be triangular, and the shaft of it should be gradually narrowed towards the end as you see here.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place it on the bone, and let it be close to the lacrimal area; extend your hand slightly, and then rotate your hand with the instrument until it penetrates fully into the bone, and you will feel the discomfort because of the air escaping when you move your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, at this time restore the place with styptic medicines that dry in a similar manner as has been described.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh and the place have become hardened, at this time the matter which was discharged to the surrounding parts returns to the center, thus it is easier for the healing.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the Reduction of the Eminence of the Wound.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the wound protrudes entirely and no harm or reduction occurs in the surrounding area, then it is necessary to let the patient rest, and afterwards follow up with gentle poultices on the head without scarification and apply proper suction; then place a liniment made of aloes, sesame, and sarcocolla over the wound, and afterwards strengthen the plaster on the wound using powdered materials.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method for the powdered materials is that you take strips of linen cloth, and each strip should be folded into four parts; then make powder from those strips.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And afterwards place those powders one over the other according to the quantity that the wound requires.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And afterwards strengthen them with a thick cloth tightly bound over them; and repeat the suction with gentle poultices without scarification; then remove the poultices and leave the wound uncovered day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if in the meantime the ligature becomes loosened, then it must be made tight again.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And afterwards remove the ligature both day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the swelling has already been reduced, that is good, and if not, then apply again the plaster with the powder and the ligature and the suction cups until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the prominence of the uveal tunic.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When you find a disruption in the uveal tunic, and it is prominent and protrudes outside the eyelids like a grain of rice, and its shape resembles that of a person due to this condition, and you wish to incise it, then perform the operation as we have described: insert the needle at the base of the uvea from below and above, and subsequently place another needle where the double thread is located, near the lacrimal part. Allow this needle to penetrate and leave the first needle in its position; then incise the site of the double thread and lift that part of the uvea around the needle, and strengthen it thus.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle and place over the swelling lint infused in egg white, and leave it until the thread comes out with the uvea.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat the swelling with what comforts it until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And on some occasions, apply around the swelling a circle of cloth to fit the prominent area, and then pierce it with a fine probe to reach the center of the swelling, allowing the moisture to drain, and reduce the swelling quickly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of wounds.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness which is called alconati is not the one that appears on the skin like water descending, and it is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treating this condition is to have the patient sit on a prepared and straight saddle, then take hold of their head with both hands, and move it in such a way that you see the pus reaching the lower parts, and once dried up so that it no longer descends, leave it be, and the patient will see the causes as clearly as they did before.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend to the lower parts, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the pus does not descend as we have said, then have the patient sit between your hands and take a fine spatula and apply it to the conjunctiva slightly above the continuation of the conjunctiva at the cornea, around the circumference, so that the pus is discharged.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once it is discharged, then you should apply warm water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with the other methods until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water descending from the eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the types of water in the division and which ones are suitable for piercing, as explained earlier, according to the condition.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now you should make the patient lie down on a bed or bench and lift his limb, using a pad to support it.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And approach with your left hand near the eyelid of his eye if the affected eye is the left; or with your right hand, if the eye is the right.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And approach with your right hand to hold the probe if the eye is left; or with your left hand, if the eye is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And place the tip of the probe near the edge for the thickness of the ray in the white of the eye towards the smallest tear duct, and then insert it vertically and rotate your hand around it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel when the probe has reached the curved causeway.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And ensure that the distance of the probe to the preon is equal to the space from the pupil to the edge of the dark area, which is the edge of the eye; for you will see through the pupil with the clarity of the corneal tissue.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the probe into the area where the fluid is, and then pull it out once or twice, and if the fluid comes out immediately, now you see the patient's condition based on how quickly the fluid drains, and with the probe in the eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then pause for a moment; if the fluid has drained, now pull out the probe after some time has passed.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it has stopped and no more fluid is draining, now gently remove the probe, rotating your hand slowly; then dissolve a small amount of clear salt from a gem in the fluid and rinse the eye with this solution. Then place a piece of cloth or leather soaked in rose oil and egg white over the eye.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	Let us and those who come after us understand how to treat a wound on the thigh with a piece of linen.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the instrument does not obey because of the hardness of the wound — for there are some men whose wound is hard due to this — then you should take the spatum, which is called alburad, and this is its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And thus perforate in that joint, and do not stop your hand in the movement, so that you make a subtle passage for the instrument.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then insert the instrument as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should prepare the patient for recovery by placing them in a comfortable room that is appropriately prepared, where they will sleep on their back in a darkened room, and all movements must be prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pay attention to the nature of his body so that its nature becomes smooth, and do not turn his head to the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And bandage according to his condition on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then untie it in that dark room and show the patient the wound's condition, explain some causes to them, and then re-bandage it on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And you should not do this at the hour of the curative treatment or very close to it.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Handle this so that the water can flow freely and quickly due to great and vigorous care.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess occurs, then you should untie the dressing before the seventh day and treat it with whatever helps to resolve the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	For four days you should cover the eyes with a patch and direct their attention to the mouth through which they will be given nourishment, keeping them in the darkest place possible.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then gradually take them out of that dark place and converse with them about their concerns.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in alchemy, the disciple is not exempt from certain visions, and now you should be bold about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has already been conveyed to us by some of those who know the Art, and some have said that they make fire in the Ajrad, which is perforated through which water flows.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have not seen anyone in our land who has accomplished this, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is something new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of perforation for those who are unaware of them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or proper steel, and their extremities are made with this subtlety in a triangular shape, the sharp end exactly as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of flesh wounds on the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When on the nose there appear various flesh growths that are attached, some of which have causes similar to a scorpion bite from poisonous words, or to a sea polyp; and this disease is called polypus because it resembles such a sea creature.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And in it there is cancerous flesh, wasting away, of dark color; and in some cases, the flesh is lion-colored but not dark.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in the case of flesh that is not infected with corruption or cancer, have the patient sit between your thighs and expose it to the sun, and starve the tumor by applying cold to those parts.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract from the inner parts, and carefully incise what you have identified with a sharp, fine scalpel to the point where you know that all the flesh has been cut through; if it should remain intact for any reason by which separation is possible, at that moment you must sever it with one of the finer instruments with ease so that it does not remain attached for any reason.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if it is ruled by pus or an accidental abscess caused by burning, then you must wait for what is necessary; or if it is one of the malignant abscesses, then you should cut and cauterize it so that blood is separated and all the cavities are opened.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then place a dressing near the incision, close to the nose with water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the wound is suppurated and you notice moisture reaching the palate, then you will know that it has healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the moisture does not penetrate as needed, then you will know that inside there is flesh still attached to the excess pus-filled bones to which separation has not reached.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, you should insert into the patient something solid to which a thread is attached, and wrap it in walnut shells, placing between each shell an amount equal to the width of your finger or less. Engage the patient and insert one end of the thread into the wound either with a ray or by another means possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	Of pus that water does make, that one should direct the odorament into so it reaches the channels of the nose, and place it upon its gauze, for troops accustomed to this action do children at schools, and is easy cause for him who wants to perform it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause the two extremities of the probe, one extremity that exits over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a piece of flesh to cover the nuts that are inside the probe, and do this until you know that the flesh has covered the nuts within the probe.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then remove the probe, and place in the nose near the bleeding an application, and do this for three days or more until it has corroded everything that remains of the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the treatment, place in the nose a lead tube for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you prefer a drying treatment, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument used for purging, from which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make this of silver or ivory, which should resemble a small tube, like a small cone, and the opening similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed tube like a reed, and the tube of the instrument used for purging should be flat and open; to which there should be a handle at the back, with which you can hold it when heating in oil or what you want from juices and suctionable causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	Here is the precious recipe for a nostrum: take of castoreum, of white balsam, of ginger, and saffron powder, of long pepper, of scabiosa, and spica each an ounce six. Mix with them the juice of barley and hair, and make pills, and mix one pill with sweet water, and give it to the sick person lying facing forward.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	About the holes in the nostrils.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Most often is the hole in the nostrils narrow, and it is enlarged and treated over several days during which one must pay attention to it.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason, you should treat it at the beginning of its appearance, and you should continue to treat it entirely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then pause on the place where you cauterized or applied a burning medicine, which was there instead.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if the treatment is delayed until it needs to be enlarged, then consider whether it has become hardened, tough, dark in color, and with little sensation. At this point, do not touch it with a probe because often such an abscess becomes chronic; for most of the time, when you attempt to treat this abscess too late, it is due to great negligence towards it earlier.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is touchable and not dark in color, and if incision is possible at all, then evacuate the pus and incise it without fear, and treat the area with something that dries and constricts until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On suturing the nose and lips and the ear when the continuity is dissolved by plague or similar conditions.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when dissolution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, few perform this operation except on certain individuals.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when there is any cause for those conditions, you should consider whether it is a fresh wound or with bleeding, and then you adjust the two sides of the wound with sutures, and afterward treat what lies within so that it may heal.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the edges of the continuity dissolution are already separated and each is made clean, then you should scrape away each part of its visible edge until blood appears.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two edges with sutures and strengthen them, and over those apply powder of dragon’s blood and sprinkle it, and place on top a piece of diafinitive plaster or another consolidating plaster, and leave that area for two days or three, and then remove that and change the plaster and leave what lies within until the pus is completely absorbed, and then treat with an ointment so that it may heal.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the method of suturing is that you join the dissolution of continuity either with needles as we have recommended for abdominal sutures, or join the edges of the wound with pus as appropriate to your judgment.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the extraction of those causes that occur in the two edges in their internal parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Often in the internal parts of the edges of some people's wounds, there are hard abscesses similar to grease from goats, and some of them are smaller while others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Then convert the lips and fissures of each of those hardnesses from every side, and afterwards fill the place with fine cloth so that the blood may be restrained, and afterwards wash it well with something astringent and heal the place with water that is styptic until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On incising the flesh attached to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great care must be taken when there is a growth on the flesh attached to the gum, which the ancients called "albulus." Then you should suspend that with a thread or hold it with forceps and incise it at its base, and allow the pus or blood to flow.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And afterwards apply fine cloth or other styptic powder or astringents to the wound.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, for afterwards the cauterized area will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On extracting teeth with iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth of the inner and outer parts and between the gums to which they are attached, there are rough spots, tumors, and some growths are blackened and become yellow or green until the gum becomes corrupt due to this corruption and the teeth become diseased.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And then you should make the patient sit between your hands and place his head in your lap, and rasp the teeth on which these rough spots appear until no such cause remains, and this will remove the blackness and yellowness and other such discolorations so that they are cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Thus if you are at that point in the reasoning from its beginning, it is good; and if not, then return to the reasoning on those points another day and on the second and third until it comes to the final statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have the need for various shapes and figures of forceps according to how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And because the razors with which the tooth is cut are different from the razor used to file between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare those which you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the Extraction of Teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Take care of the tooth from its pain with all gentleness and delay in total extraction, for there is no remedy that can replace it once it is extracted, since it is a substance sublime that deserves exemption from such removal.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, you must be certain which tooth is causing pain, for often the pain deceives the patient and they believe it to be in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one but immediately the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is removed, as we have already seen through the experience of surgeons.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, when you must be certain which tooth is painful, and once you know well, then it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth with a spatula having some virtue until it dissolves the tooth from the gum completely, and then move it using your fingers or with fine forceps little by little until it comes out.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Near the root of the tooth take strong pincers or forceps firmly, and place the head of the patient between your fingers so that he does not move, and then pull out the tooth straight in such a way that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And then if it is not loose, take one of those instruments and place it below from all sides and try to remove the tooth in the same way as was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is fractured or decayed, then cover that part with cloth and bind it tightly to the root with a thin thread so that it does not break when you compress it with the forceps.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And it is necessary that you act extremely carefully when cutting around the entire gum area and be mindful of your strength so that you do not break it or leave any part behind, and return to the patient because it is better than the initial pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their rashness and audacity when removing teeth, as they do not administer what we have recommended; for often it leads to great harm to sick people which is much harder to remedy, and the reasons for this are entirely due to them or partially, or because they extract the tooth along with some bones of the jaw, as we have often testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And after the extraction of the tooth, wash the mouth with warm water or salt water.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is bleeding due to this, as often happens, then take some quantity of egg yolk and apply it to the wound, and if that does not stop the bleeding, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and thin tongs with which the tooth is grasped at the beginning should be long in length, short in handle, and thick, so that they are not bent when you work with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should be like bars of thick handle so that when you turn them the tongs are not bent, they should have short extremities.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of Indian iron for the straight parts and at the ends should have teeth that fit into one another and turn by strong constriction, and sometimes the ends should be in the shape of a bird’s beak called a ciconia, which is a kite, and they are of strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the extraction of teeth and the removal of bones from the locked jaw.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you must extract a tooth that is locked due to some cause, it is necessary for you to pause and apply something warm to the area for one day or two until the site becomes softened; then insert these or tongs with ends shaped like the beak of a bird called a ciconia or kite, the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of these should be made inside like a file or rasp.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if it does not obey when you attempt with these forceps or tongs, then you should cut around the root and remove all the flesh and insert an instrument called an atali, which is a small lever whose form is as follows:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let a small part be cut from a thick extremity, and it should not be swallowed so that it does not rattle.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the cutting is done by water, it is good; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extremity in which there is some thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a finer extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now help yourself with this instrument which has two blades, of which this is the form as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And use other instruments which I will describe for tooth scraping; because the procedure is done with this instrument which resembles a small animal's horn, and this is its form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the curved or short triangular extremity, which has some thickness, and it should not be swallowed so that it does not rattle.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And know that the instruments for teeth are sharp and similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the skilled and subtle artisan finds for himself according to what he understands about the operation and various diseases; for there are diseases for which the ancients did not describe or leave a proper instrument, due to their diverse forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth rattles, or if you need to, now apply proper treatment over that place with what is suitable for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned for the extraction of tooth roots, and help yourself with this gesture, of which this is the form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let it be removed bit by bit, and let it be held at the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all of the bone is extracted; then restore the place with medicines suitable for this purpose.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if there is a small ulcer in the bone, then remove that and its blackness, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of teeth that protrude beyond the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the prominent teeth do not follow their natural course due to their form being lax, especially when this occurs in women and more so in those who are venerable; therefore, you should consider: if a tooth is very close to another tooth, and there is no possibility of extraction or treatment without causing damage, then root out that one. But ensure it does not attach to the adjacent tooth; at this point, you incise it with an instrument of this shape; it resembles a pig's tusk, and it is made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp tip.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your incision be such that when you incise it over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, it does not become inflamed or affect other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is a prominent tooth that needs filing, then file it with an Indian steel file of this shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it be entirely made of Indian steel and grind it appropriately; it should have very fine points as with a file used to make needles, with which the tooth is filed little by little over several days with ease, so that other teeth are not inflamed or harmed.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Along the edge lines there, and cut that with razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth of which one part is broken and you shape the tongue, immediately file that inside where the sharpness of that fracture is smoothed out, and fill it so that the tongue is not injured and the speech is not impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of defective teeth with gold or silver filling.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When it happens that the front teeth are loosened or dislocated by impact or accident, and the patient cannot bite properly due to this, and you have treated them with astringent medicines, but your treatment has not been effective, then because they do not bite correctly, attach those that are strong with gold and not silver, for silver changes color and soon deteriorates, whereas gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the filling be of such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the work is that you take the filling and place twice as much of it between two healthy teeth, and then build up with two tortuosity of the filling between one or more defective teeth, until it reaches the surface of the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then continue the filling from the part where you started, and strengthen your work with ease and skill so that it is not defective.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And when you strengthen the filling, be careful not to injure the roots of the teeth.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then trim the excess filling with forceps or scissors, and shape those parts as needed, and place them between the healthy tooth and the defective one so that they do not injure the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And thus he leaves it as narrow as a Roman would.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is loose or ruptured, strengthen it or those parts with another thread in such a way for all its duration.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the alignment of two healthy teeth and of two defective teeth, as you sometimes see them joined:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it happens that one tooth or two are returned to their proper place, and they grow back as we have recounted, and remain in place.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And only a good artisan and wise person can do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes a cause for using cow bones is given, and it is shaped like a tooth, and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves as that tooth for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the incision of the membrane that is in the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament that is below the tongue sometimes is natural and one has it from birth, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The operation is to open the mouth of the patient, with their head tilted back; and lift their tongue, and then cut that ligament along the nerve according to its width, ensuring it is freed from the root.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or knot in it, and this has occurred due to the healing of an injury, then you should incise it carefully and cut it along its width until the knot is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful that no cut is made in the skin and that you do not sever here any artery or vein, causing a flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then let the remnants of the incision be washed with cold water or vinegar or salted water; and afterwards place a licorice stick there; this is how the bad taste that accumulates under the tongue should be removed each night so that it does not consolidate elsewhere.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if blood flow occurs, place over the area triturated vitriol; but if the blood spurts, then immediately cauterize the spot with a hot iron, which is appropriate for such cases.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with the other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the Extraction of a Ranula Under the Tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	In some cases, an abscess similar to a small swelling occurs under the tongue, preventing it from performing its natural function; and quickly it enlarges to the point of filling the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the procedure is that you should open the mouth wide in front of the light and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it as a dark or black color, hard, and one that the patient does not feel any sensation in, then do not touch what is clearly gangrenous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it appears inclined towards a whiter color, which is moist, then you should place your finger there, and cut it with a sharp scalpel, cutting it completely; and if blood spurts during the operation, immediately apply crushed zinc sulfate, also known as vitriol, to control the bleeding.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work after it has been treated thoroughly with water and salt; and care for it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter xxxvi.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the incision of an abscess in both armpits and that which is near the groin, and of other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When you find an abscess in the groin area, it involves glands that are clustered together and appear outside the body, known as armpits. If you treat them as we have described in the division and they do not heal, then consider whether the abscess is hard, dark in color, and insensitive. At this point, do not touch it with an instrument.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is red in color and the root is large, then do not touch it with an instrument due to the flow of blood. Instead, leave it until it has matured on its own, and either you will then extract it, or it will burst open by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is white in color, soft, and the root of it is delicate, then that should be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the procedure is that you consider, before your operation, whether the abscess has already rested and healed somewhat on its own or if it has diminished in any way. Then make the patient sit facing the sunlight, and place his head to one side, and expose the mouth of the abscess. The assistant should hold firmly the area around the opening with their hand, and then use a noble instrument of this form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or iron, and as thin as a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Thus, when you press with your finger upon that tongue and the abscess is shown to you, then apply heat over it firmly; now take some honey and place it in an opening, and draw it out towards the outer parts as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another one you pull out from the cause of the tunics, and then cut it with an instrument whose form is as follows:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is similar to forceps, but the ends of it are curved, so that the opening of each one of them is aligned with the other, with sharp points, which should be made of iron.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not available to you, then cut it with a scalpel whose form is as follows: It should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have cut one incision, cut the other in the same manner, and then wash the wounds with clean water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is bleeding, wash with water boiled with lemon peels or myrtle leaves and similar astringents until the flow of blood is stopped, and then treat it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes there appear in the throat other abscesses similar to those two ears, and cut them as I have said regarding the incision of two incisions similarly.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I had treated a woman with an abscess that was born in her throat, which abscess tended to have a dark color and little feeling, it had already closed the throat, and she breathed through a narrow passage, and she had been forbidden from eating and drinking water, and she would have reached death if it had not been for my intervention within one or two days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	The abscess had burst so much that it discharged through two channels within the two rims.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I inserted it fistularly and placed it in one of their incisions, and pulled that out, and what was removed was of the large portion, and then I proceeded to that which included from the other side, and then I closed its mouth, and comprehended its tongue, and then I placed the incision in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Then I removed a large part of it, and only a little blood ran from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then the girl was completely recovered, and she began to drink water right away, and soon after she started to eat food. Therefore, I did not stop incising that abscess for many times over a long period, and an abscess succeeded in that place, which I incised until it was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I applied something and cauterized the girl's wound, then it became adhered; and afterwards I walked around and did not know what God would do with that right after me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter xxxvii.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the incision of the cheek when it is abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When mucus is present in the cheek and it is abscessed and elongated, it is then called perpendicular; and if it is in the lower part thick and round, it is then called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	However, when it is cured as we have described in the division and does not conform to your treatment, and you see that it has already abscessed and is subtle, then it is necessary for you to incise those that are aggregated and round; and if it is of such length and is bloody, dark or black, and is not at the center, then it is necessary for you to attempt its incision, because there is fear of malady in that.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that it is according to the method I have said about its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit and press the tongue with an instrument of which the form suits it, and place the incision in the new position, and pull it down and incise it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two membranes.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And you should not incise it beyond the natural limit, for if you incise too much, you will impair their speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And after the incision, use what we have recommended for the incision of two membranes, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the incision, you should use an anesthetic during cauterization to alleviate their fear. The method of the cautery is nothing but with sharp water. Place the head of the patient in your lap, and then press the tongue with the instrument we have described. Then take the water we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization and apply it in a warm manner, and pour it not thick nor thin into the concavity of the instrument whose shape is this:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the extremity of the concavity in which the medicine is placed be like the concavity of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the palate, and the patient lies on their back so that saliva or mucus from the mouth does not flow out due to the internal medicine, thus preventing any loss of it.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then with your hand on the medicine, apply it to the uvula for a short while until you see it become blackened and numbed by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a sponge and wrap it around the tip of the reed, and immerse the sponge in the medicine, and insert the reed with the sponge into a tube so that the sponge adheres to that tube, and do this as many times as needed until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the grape, and then leave it alone until it dries and falls off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and then after the cauterization clean around the grape with a sponge dipped in vinegar, and modify what is around it from the medicine, and wash it with salt water, and treat it externally with embrocation, and internally with remedies until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of treatment is safer than incision and more enduring in terms of fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	In some cases, the grape is cured with something that cauterizes and incises less severely, as it is treated by subfumigation in this manner: take wax, hyssop, thyme, rue, Arabian saffron, chamomile, and similar herbs, and mix all of these or some of them in a container, and immerse them in sour wine, which should be boiled; the pot should be moderately heated, and at the bottom of the pot place a tray, on top of which place an instrument made of reed according to this method; it can be made of silver or reed.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the end into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor reaches the uvula through the tube, until the uvula is sufficiently treated.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Regarding the incisions made within what is dry tissue, be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the onset of abscesses, for it would be too early for the abscess, and you should not do that, but rather wait for the development of the abscess clearly.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If this instrument is not available to you, now take a cane and attach at its end a cover of cloth, so that the mouth of the wound is covered, for the covering of cloth prevents the vapor from entering the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and what adheres to the skin and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Incisions in the tissue adhering to the skin or a fish spine or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you should remove what is apparent from those things, upon which your gaze falls, and after pressing the tongue with an instrument in front of light, so that it becomes clear to you what is on the tongue.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, for the cause attached to the throat will be easily expelled by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of bread or lettuce juice or a bite of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge and tie it firmly with thread, and then have the patient swallow that, as when it reaches the location where thorns are lodged, they will be easily expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Take one eel and boil it in vinegar, then remove its intestines and extract the contents; or take a poultice and apply the preparation to it and let it be treated with the extract.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If you do not forget the causes that we have mentioned, now use an instrument of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be as thick as a small reed, and at the end of it let there be a curve which you insert into its throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And when the patient’s head is raised up, be careful not to touch the bones of the throat, so that it does not harm the body and also the bone or spine, or cause injury to the physician who performs it.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, if the patient who inserts it is skillful, knowing the location of the cause attached and pushing it in appropriately, and pulls his hand with the instrument up, all this according to the quantity that has been prepared within until it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of a leech attached to the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When a leech is treated with what we have said in the division of treatment with medicines and not compresses, now consider the patient's throat in sunlight, since you have retracted the tongue of the patient with the instrument that we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you see the leech, remove it gently with a small forceps or with fine tweezers appropriately.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to remove it with that, now take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's throat, and then place a heated iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this many times (until the leech dies and falls off) and have the patient abstain from water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Take a piece of flax soaked in water and place it on the wound, and work it into the mouth of the cavity, and wash out the mouth with that; and do not let any cause make you remove from there anything else and change the water every hour with its own hand, for as soon as the leech feels the water it will bite.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not possible to perform what we have recommended with this, then fumigate the wound with cimex or asafetida by means of the instrument which we have described for the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so that it may fall out.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another method of operation in fumigation of this, which is that you take an urn in which are burning coals and the urn is covered with a cover in the middle of which is a hole, and attach the end of the instrument to that hole; and then proceed above for the fumigation; and place the wound over the mouth of the tube, and close it so that the fumigation does not escape until you know that the fumigation has reached the leech, for the leech will immediately fall out.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not bite, then proceed with the fumigation as many times as necessary, and prevent the patient from drinking, and give causes that are salty and dry, and let them not drink water, and in this way it is necessary for this regimen to be followed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which the leech is removed from the body when it is seen; and it resembles forceps as you see, but there is some curvature to it:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed in the joint, and its extremity resembles the beak of a stork, which is a kind of claw, on which there are grooves, so that when it presses upon any cause, it does not slip.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the discourse on the preparation for abscesses and their incision.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are various types of swellings, in many ways, as will be recalled for each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they differ in their puncture and incision by two methods, of which one is according to the nature of the abscess itself; and by what presses upon the humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is according to the locations where they occur in the body, for an abscess occurring in the head is different from one occurring in the buttocks; and an abscess occurring in a fleshy part is different from one occurring in a joint; and each has its treatment by surgical operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And there are some abscesses that should not be punctured but left until the pus has properly matured or they have reached completion.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	There are other abscesses that should be treated when they are crosswise and not properly matured, such as those near joints, for when an abscess is near a joint, its nature extends around it until you can reach what is inside it, and if the ligaments or nerves of that joint become corrupted because of it, it becomes a cause of contraction of that member; or if it is near a principal limb, and if you delay puncturing it before it has matured, it may harm the principal limb; or if it is near the buttocks, then puncture it when it is not fully matured; but do not puncture it raw, without proper digestion, except what is near the buttocks, so that you do not leave behind pus which can extend to deeper parts of the buttocks and cause a fistula, or that it be done in such a way that it cannot heal.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	May it be known that you should know the time for piercing the abscess, and this is when it is ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you should know that it is ripe when there is a reduction in pain and the cessation of fever, and soon after a decrease in redness and pulsation, and the sharpness at the head of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you should know that the piercing should be done in the place where the pus is below the abscess and comes from the highest part of the swelling.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the piercing should always be done along the length of the flesh or body if the abscesses are in parts like the limbs or joints, and in places away from veins, tendons, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all places equal to those where there is no reflection; for in those that do reflect, use piercing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, the best time is to delay the piercing until the second stage of digestion is confirmed, as we have said; for if you pierce it before that, it prolongs the suffering of the patient and increases corruption, and makes the lips of the abscess hardened and its depth greater.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some abscesses should be pierced according to the width of the flesh or body due to necessity, or according to what the limb requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you should administer a small piercing, and in large abscesses, a larger and wider piercing or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other abscesses in which the treatment should be hollowed out and cut open, when it is done as if with bread dough and is performed at a time when it is ready, just as occurs with those that happen from excessive debility and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those which are incised with a section having three angles; and of those is in which it is incised as the figure of a myrtle leaf, as the abscesses of the fingers.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those in which round section and lunar section are administered, similar to these.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But in the case where there is none such as their superficial lion abscesses, it is necessary that you pierce it with a superficial puncture, or simply scrape it.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has already collected pus and unhealthy matter, you should pierce it but do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted one part from it, on another day scrape the abscess inside, and then extract a larger part, and continue doing this several times according to its degree of inflammation.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is a young man, or pregnant woman, or small child, or elderly in debility, for the animal spirit's many visits are resolved with the evacuation of the pus, and the patient easily recovers, and you will heal them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Therefore, guard this chapter with great caution, and after your puncture in which you pierce these abscesses, it is necessary that you cleanse the wounds and then consider whether the wound of the abscess is small or if it is a flat section; at that time administer some of them with lint or old cloth. And if the abscess is large and the cracks of the puncture are many, then it is necessary that you place wax in each groove until they heal together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the cord has been cut or has become concave around it, then you should fill it with old cloth or thread made from linen, as when you treat ulcers or roots without moisture; and strengthen that on the third day; and afterwards proceed with it and care for it according to what is needed of ointments until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If blood flows during the time of your operation, then at that hour administer water mixed with vinegar in which you dip a cloth, and place that over the site of the bleeding for several times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the bleeding persists, then you should administer treatment and cure as well as powders which I have recommended in various places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is in the time of winter, and the site of the abscess is a place with many nerves, then you should administer powders mixed with vinegar and hot oil, and apply those to the sites.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the sites are fleshy, then you should apply powders soaked in water and oil or in vinegar and oil, and keep this moistened until the third day, as we have said, and then you should open the abscess and clean it and administer to its cure what it needs until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses generally, but according to the method of distinction I have already said about each abscess in what manner is the way of its cure separately by chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On the section of abscesses which appear in the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the neck of the head, small abscesses appear, and they are of various types of knots that contain membranes; and their types vary.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they are soft, and those contain moisture similar to jelly.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	Of those things which contain humidity like dust, and similar to them; and of those things which are stony, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as you should know that the extraction of those does not contradict the art of surgery.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you express them with an instrument whose form approaches this, which is called an entremes, until you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what it contains is humidity, then you should cut it with a section according to its length by making a superficial section according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin the section from the line of .B. to the line of .G. Then, as the humidity is evacuated, you should remove the skin that contains this moisture, and do not leave any part of it behind, for if any part remains, it may lead to further issues returning.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then submerge a piece of lint in Egyptian ointment if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with this and leave it for another day, for this will dissolve everything that remains of that membrane.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply the lint again with Egyptian ointment a second and third time if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining part of that membrane; now treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if an abscess contains hard nodules, then you should incise it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	This is a cross-shaped incision, and place the point of your instrument between two lips of the incision and scrape it all around, and exert your strength in extracting the membrane which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If your surgery encounters difficulties, now do what I have first recounted to you.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly proceed with the incision and treatment of the abscess as we have told you; and an incision on a calcified abscess is easier, because it contains little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes there are cases of abscesses in the head in some people who do not have much moisture throughout; the reason for this is that I once incised an abscess on an old woman's head and found it as hard as a stone, rough, white, and could not be extracted, and if anyone were to strike it with force, it would injure them.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	However, in other abscesses that occur in the head, this is not the case of this chapter; likewise, for abscesses that appear on infants' heads and behind their ears, the incision should be superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And avoid piercing those in the lower region because it would cause the pus to flow to the lower parts of the body.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And treat those accordingly as is appropriate for such cases.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the incision of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Often these abscesses appear in the neck and armpits; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and such as are generated between them, and all scrofula of those is within its own proper sheath, and likewise as in the knots and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the kinds of these scrofulas are knots, for some of those are lithic, and among those which contain moisture, and among those are malignant ones which do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that one which you find to be well disposed during the examination, whose color is similar to that of the skin, and is soft throughout, and is not attached to the neck nerves or veins, and does not protrude, ensure that you incise it at the surface layer of the area above and below the middle line of .G. within the line of .B., and peel it off entirely from all sides, extending the edges of the skin to one inch, or more inches if necessary, as we have said regarding abscesses of the head, and extract it bit by bit.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is best to be cautious not to incise the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatula not be sharp, so that it does not disturb your hand during incision or cause pain to the patient, and do not incise what is not necessary; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and prohibit yourself from continuing the operation, then apply a salve of vitriol trissect or other powders that promote blood flow, and staunch the wound. Let it remain inside until the acuteness of the abscess subsides and the swelling is mollified and begins to soften.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is cut off.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore return to your operation after you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire of the patient whether there is any cause for the other small scrophules, therefore incise those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the large scrophula, be careful not to incise that scrophula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Also be careful to tie it with a strong ligature and let it fall off by itself without harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cotton that you have already soaked in Egyptian oil, and then dress it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise the scrophula completely, then be careful to approximate the two lips of the wound and suture them immediately so that there is no room for any superfluity.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is excessive superfluity due to the size of the scrophula, then be careful to incise its root, and evacuate it and administer sutures as mentioned.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for the scrophulas that contain humidity, pierce them with a shallow incision where the place of maturation appears to you, and do not penetrate deeper into what might cause pus formation in the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer an incision, wash it with appropriate ointment and similar preparations, so that it corrodes what is left of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	When you see that the wound is cleansed, then you cure it by applying fresh flesh that has been generated.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the incision of the pustule of the abscess within the armpit.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients called this incision an epilhot, but I have not seen anyone in our region perform this procedure.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of their speech.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in cases where men have scrofula, it should be avoided to perform the extraction of the epilhot, as it is not beneficial because all the veins and major vessels are affected here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have boils that occur in the mouth or armpit or ears, when the illness is not in the bone, it is advisable to use the incision of the epilhot to avoid the damage caused by puncture.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do this, the epilhot should be incised below three circles of the epilhot's circles, or four if it is a small incision along its length between two circles in quantity. The incision should be made in the ciphac, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for incision because it lacks flesh and the blood vessels are close to the surface.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the physician is cautious, he should then extend the arm of the armpit and proceed to cut along it until he reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any reason to do so.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Here is the translation:
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	If the swelling has been present for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, as the hour arrives when the puncture is feared, add two edges of the root of the swelling, and cut to where the cartilage is.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that cause the flesh to grow until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Al-Bucasis says that the essence of what we have recounted is to see that some of these abscesses have already blocked the passage of the patient's breath, and the patient has come within reach of death, and the airway is cut off, and some will incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the site of the swelling for a short time, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And by this command the swelling should be left open until the malignity of the illness is consumed; and the malignity lasts for three days; therefore, at that time the command is to treat the swelling, and care for it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen myself is that a servant took a knife and cut into their own throat, severing part of the windpipe, and I was called to treat them. Upon arrival, I found the wound as it would be in someone near death, and discovered the swelling and saw the blood that had come from the swelling.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, I confessed that she had not cut any vein or artery, and the air was coming from the swelling, and I treated her until she was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And the servant did not suffer any harm except for hoarseness in her voice, and after some days she returned to improvement in her condition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Here I say that in the section of the episiotomy there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the section on abscess which occurs in the groin area, and is called hernia of the groin.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess called hernia of the groin is large according to the size of the body, and it occurs in females.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it happens in two ways, for it is either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, there is no need for treatment.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one happens in two ways, one of which is similar to fatty knots, and the other way is similar to an abscess caused by arterial obstruction, and in that case there is cause for fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And one should not attempt to treat it with iron unless it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should proceed cautiously and investigate it as described. If you find it similar to fatty knots and not attached to any veins, then incise it as you would with nodes, and extract it with water that contains the skin and bursiclam; if not, thoroughly examine its nature, and subsequently treat the area as appropriate for internal treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the section on types of knots.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	There are various types of knots, and I have already described all their types in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	Here is the translation:
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Thus I say that with evacuation there is heat and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the superfluity ceases; and it completes putrefaction when then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But now there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and continue that regimen which is appropriate for one who has had an evacuation.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it depends on the color of the skin, and its beginning is like a pimple and is formed as if it were voided, whether larger or smaller, and they are of two kinds, either dry or fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture vary, as I say in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of this condition, express that and inquire about it at the beginning concerning the disturbance which is called an intercurrent disease, as its form will come in the chapter which is near to this one.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes, which is that you take this probe and insert it into the most humid part of the location which you find in the abscess, and you will move your fingers little by little until you know that the probe has already penetrated the tissue.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then withdraw it gradually according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and then extract what has been inserted and observe what comes out in its wake.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the flowing moisture, of whatever color it may be, is expelled, then you shall incise it at a superficial section as I have said regarding other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if from the trace of the probe there is no moisture, then you know that it is dry.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And draw upon the dry part in a cross shape according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As you have been taught, suspend that part and shave the wound all around with ease, and preserve the skin or sac if possible over it and extract that pus from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is ruptured during the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and you should proceed carefully with this knowledge, and then you extract it in pieces so that none of it remains for any reason.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if any of it remains for any reason, little or much, the node will return accordingly.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that any part of it remains, then complete the treatment with some caustic powders and strengthen the wound, and place on that which is an abscess a cautery, and cure that by another method until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the node is large, then you should cut both sides of it and cure that with what promotes healing.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if a pulsating vein or non-pulsating vein is opposite it, then you should cauterize and fill the place with triply refined vitriol and leave that open for two days or three until the wound becomes cleaner and the blood stops boiling; then return to cutting what remains of the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of the instruments necessary for surgery and puncture.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those, there are forms of probes, which come in three types: some are large, some are medium, and some are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of introduction is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of intermediate introduction is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of small introduction is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Prepare sharp instruments, clean cloths, and appropriately drawn extremities, so that the instrument can be quickly inserted into the abscess.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of experienced practitioners, and they are called albered, and one of them is named berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three kinds, one of which is great, one intermediate, and one small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the great experienced practitioner is as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the intermediate experienced practitioner is as follows:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small experienced practitioner is as follows:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	Convene such that they are used for abscesses, excisions, fistulas, and buboes, so that these can be treated whether they affect the bones or have other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they make probes, thick ones, lions (likely referring to a specific tool shape), as well as large needles like those used for sewing sails, which are made of citron wood, or horn, or iron, or silver. And the best are when they are made of citron wood.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the practitioners make them from black goose feathers, which they use to probe fistulas in the concavity of which there are reflections, as these are reflected by their lightness on those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And there are three kinds, some of which are long, and others medium, and the others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the constriction of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the great expert of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the medium expert of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small expert of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the hooks are of various kinds, for some are simple, having only one curve, and they are of three kinds: large, few, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And their hooks are round, and they are of three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some of them have hooks with two curves, and they are of three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some of them have hooks with three curves, and they are of three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of a large simple hook, form as follows:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a medium simple hook:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small simple hook, form as follows:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a large round hook:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a medium round hook, form as follows:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small round hook, form as follows:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a large hook with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of a medium-sized needle having two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a small needle having two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a large needle having three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a medium-sized needle having three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a small needle having three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the knives with which nodes and abscesses are incised and excised, and they are of three kinds: one is large, one is medium-sized, and one is small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Shape of a large knife:
Forma del scapel migier:	Shape of the medium-sized knife:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Shape of the small knife:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those with which section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not blunt, nor are they shaped in such a way that there is fear of cutting into a vein or nerve during the excision of nodes. This is done so that the patient may be healed and find some tranquility shortly after the adjustment following the incision of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of forceps, and they are of three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The shape of the large forceps:
Forma de magda migier:	Shape of the medium-sized forceps:
Forma de magda pauc:	Shape of the small forceps:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	If you want it and have its appearance like that of ram's horns in which it is made into alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the outer part beyond the dotted line and in that cord to the inner parts both inside and outside, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of the spatulae, which are hidden among the said feathers for the puncture of abscesses and I do not perceive them as bad practices, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of ligatures with which the blood flow is interrupted, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; the forms of these:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They should be made of citrus pith, round with some length, and they should be thin.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that these kinds of ligatures be with you large, medium, and small, so that with them you can interrupt the blood flow quickly in an emergency, and at times when there is no medicine available.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to interrupt the blood flow in every part of the body, and use them only in fleshy areas, such as on the tendons of the arms and legs, and on the fleshy parts of the shoulders, and on the belly and thighs, and similar to those of the fleshly tendons.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And at times these instruments are made of other small items resembling fish scales in this form; by which the blood is interrupted when it is done through phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some incisions are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of men's nipples, which are similar to those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some incisions become swollen; the nipples of some men should be treated with care regarding their sleep, as they begin to harden, and then the nipples become swollen, and are similar to those of women, and we apply plasters.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for one who desires this, you should cut those along a lunar section according to this form, from the line of B into the line of G, and then scrape off all the roughness, and then fill the wound with flesh-growing medicine, and then sew together the two edges of the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the nipple inclines to the sides and is softened by its size as it does in women, then it should be cut into two parts with its pus removed, along two sections similar to a lunar figure, each of which should be contained within the other at their ends so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from the line B and the line G. And then scrape off the unevenness between the two edges of the wound, remove the fat, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders as necessary until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the restlessness of the patient and the flow of blood, then you should fill the wound with cotton submerged in a corrosive liquid and leave it until this corrodes what remains of the gristle, and then care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the Incision of Abscesses That Are Located in the Throat.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that occur in the throat are among the types of scrofula, hard swellings, which contain a core that can be extracted.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And among those, only some contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised in a crescent shape as shown in this figure: from the line .G. to the line .B. And once all of the pus within the abscess has been evacuated, you then fill it with linen and leave it for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And after the linen has been left in place and the area has been treated with an appropriate ointment, it should be allowed to heal.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess belongs to the types of glands or scrofula, then you should incise it as we have described in the section on scrofula.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the infection has spread and there is gangrene, then you should administer cautery as we have previously described.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the Incision of Abscesses That Occur Due to Artery or Vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured and the membrane covering it has become consolidated, then abscesses may occur. The signs by which it can be known that inflammation and abscess are due to the artery or vein: for when the abscess is due to an artery, it tends to form along the front of the body; and if you press on the abscess with your fingers, you will hear a rustling sound in the area.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is from a vein is round at the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And sectioning this abscess is an error, especially in those areas where the armpits are, and in the angles, and on the neck, and in many places on the body; for it is dangerous, therefore it should be avoided that its treatment may involve iron, and those that are in the extremities or on the head should also be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	In the case where it is due to inflammation of the artery opening, make an incision in the longitudinal section; and near the place where the incision should be made with hooks near the artery, and separate the tunics until it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place the needle there and make it penetrate into the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread at two places, which I explain in detail when extracting two arteries that are in the thighs.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then press the area between two bandages with a cloth so that the blood stops flowing entirely while it is there, and the abscess dissolves.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer treatment in which poultices are applied so that the bandages can be removed; and then treat it with appropriate ointments so that it may heal.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess from the section of a vein, now you should have in your hand what is possible regarding the abscess along its longitudinal direction, and then insert the needle below the place where you had your hand, and make it penetrate; and tie a thread around it double so that you can extract it from the other side, and then ligate the abscess with a strong bandage as I have told you in the grapevine bandaging of both sides along the two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that you will remove the thread, then at that hour insert the needle with the wax under all the abscess. You should make the insertion of the needle first, and strengthen its place in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	When the abscess is dry in its middle part and when what is inside it has come out, then you should incise the excess of the cord, and leave what is attached to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then sprinkle on the powder which you have mixed with wine and oil, and afterwards administer the treatment made with cords and herbs until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter on the abscess that occurs due to twisting of the nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Just as an abscess can occur in arteries and veins, similarly, an abscess occurs in the nerves when they are struck or affected by excessive labor, and for similar reasons.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is done with the needle in the areas of the joints or the heel, or in any place where the joints are painful.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the surrounding tissue, and it is among the worst conditions when it is tight due to tension, and when the patient appears in a state similar to stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess that aggregates in the front of the body, and for this reason it is below the cord, and it pains throughout without going to the parts before or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, what is in the joints should not be wrapped in iron, for it will quickly lead to contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	Make a cut in the head or forehead with a spatum (a surgical instrument).
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it is a small abscess, then cut it out with forceps and remove it by root.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend it with an incision, and drain it; then apply dry dressings; and close the wound with sutures, and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 11.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the incision of an abscess that occurs on the lip as it would occur on the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Therefore, for some people, there are protrusions on their abdomens and other parts of their bodies, which are called fungous because they resemble mushrooms, whose root is fine and the head of it is large; and often the edges of these are smooth, and it can be small in size, or greatly enlarged.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one case where there were two parts on his abdomen that resembled mushrooms, and there was no difference between them, they were white and had fine roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the edges of those were inverted and split open, and moisture constantly flowed from them.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, I incised them and found inside one weighing about eighteen uncias and the other about ten uncias.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the procedure in incising them is that you should consider whether the malady is moist, and if the color of the abscess is white and moist with a fine root; then you incise it with a broad spatum, and immediately in your presence cauterize it over the fire, because in such cases the section should expel much blood; and if bleeding occurs, cauterize that area.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the wound is small and frightening, guard against making an incision with a knife; instead, take fresh lead and apply it to that place in the manner we have described; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust it in the tightness of the lead thread; therefore, do not stop applying more lead as needed until it is firmly set and falls by itself when its work is done.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the wound is of thick tissue, there is some cause for fear and dread at its incision, especially in those that are in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you might incise half of it, and then afterward cauterize that area so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then take care of it until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to presume to incise a wound that is dark in color, has little sensation, and is easily penetrated, for such a wound is likely cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And this will come to mind as a reminder of something important regarding that.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LII.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the Treatment of Hernia of the Navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Hernia of the navel is caused by various reasons; it may be due to fissures in the abdominal wall above the navel, and through this, either a membrane or bowel protrudes as in other ruptures; or it can be from blood that flows from veins or arteries depending on the case, or from trapped air in that area.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is through a crack in the scaphoid and pus issues from the tissue, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the skin; it causes severe pain, and soon appears in various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is through the protrusion of the bowel, then its situation differs greatly from what we have recounted about other abscesses; when you press that area with your fingers, it feels concealed, and soon returns; and very lightly it is felt there, and it is magnified by means of warm baths and vigorous work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is due to moisture, then it is soft and not concealed when pressed by your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it hard.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then the abscess appears with a declining black color.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is due to necrotic flesh, then the abscess is severe, large and hard, and it penetrates according to a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to gas, then the touch of it is soft.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the procedure in such cases is that you must consider whether the swelling of the navel is due to arterial blood, or venous blood, or gas; then be cautious about treating it, for there is fear and dread as I have taught you in the chapter where I discussed abscesses due to arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the swelling of the navel is due to the bowel or tissue, then you must instruct the patient to take their clothing off and stand extended; then examine around the entire navel with your hand, and then instruct them to lie down on their back; then surround the area marked by your examination around the navel with a bandage made of linen strips or cloth in an appropriate manner; then extend half of the abscess above about one inch; then bind it around the circumference firmly or loosely as is fitting.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	From the side of the abscess let the membrane be extended over the bandage and insert your finger into that pus and search for the sack; and if you have recognized or guarded it by means of the bandage, now immediately extract it and urge on the sack to the parts inside the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the tissue, now take that one ounce; and cut into the excesses of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, now encircle that spot, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and place them in those two strong threads and insert the two needles into the circuit you have made around the abscess in a cross shape, which you should make penetrate; and then divide the abscess into four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place open so that the extended flesh can drain and fall off by itself; or incise it when it has thinned out and will drain, and then treat that area with water as needed until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is of flesh or due to moisture, now it is necessary that you conquer the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or moisture which you find there, and then treat that area with what is needed and consolidate the place.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De curacio de cranc.	On the Treatment of Ulcers.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already stated, in the division, about the types of ulcers and in what manner they are treated with medicines, and that it is necessary for their treatment by hand so that they do not become ulcerated; and we have discussed ulcers generated in the manner and caution of their cure.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients would say that sometimes crain [cancer] is in a place where it is possible to eradicate it, just as with crain which is in the breasts or in the armpits and similar parts assigned to remove all of that, especially when it begins small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and hard, there is no need for me to deal with it, because I cannot heal anyone from that, nor have I seen another who could, nor has anyone reached such a stage.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is when it is necessary, as we have said, that you precede and leave the patient and purge from black bile several times, and then let them bleed if there is obvious congestion.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for preparation in which the operation is located, and then apply hooked instruments that are necessary for it; and then incise completely with a good scalpel for excision so that there remains no cause for recurrence of it.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not apply poultices to it hastily, and press the areas, and remove the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is suitable among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if it is contrary to you to cut thick blood from a vein or artery, then cauterize that until the flow of blood ceases, and then treat it with other methods until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 56.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the Treatment of Hydrophobia.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, on the types of hydrophobia from water, and the signs of each type, and the treatment of it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	Of her who is treated with iron there is only the type of wound alone, and it is not approximated with iron to the type of tympanites nor to the type of hypochondria, for that is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this type of hydroptic tympanites with medicines and do not confirm your treatment, now consider whether the sick person has become weakened or is suffering from another sickness such as hydroptic, just as if it were coughs or other chest conditions similar to these. Now guard yourself that you do not treat them with iron, for there is fear regarding this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the sick person is robust in health, and in him there is no other sickness but hydroptic alone, and neither child nor old person, then the method of the operation on him is that you lift the patient between your hands, and have the minister approach and squeeze his belly with his hand, expelling the water from below the navel, and afterward take a sharp probe in this manner:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	it should be of two sharp points long, with a sharp end like a probe; but it should have some slight curvature little by little, so that in the operation you do not pass into the bowel and thereby injure him.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the origin of the hydroptic condition is from the bowels, for then it is necessary that in the incision you distance yourself from the navel by the amount of three fingers at each side, directly over the navel.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the origin of the hydroptic condition is from disease of the kidneys, then your incision should be to the left of the navel by three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is from the gall, then your incision must be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side where the patient wants to lie down because this would cause the superfluities to rush to that place, which would be harmful.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then perforate with the instrument all of the gallbladder, and then insert into that section, and raise your hand between the gallbladder and the duct, and you will extract it; and if the quantity is that of one fingernail or so.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then perforate the duct so that it reaches an empty space, which is where the fluid will drain.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument which has the following form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or ivory or lion leather, at the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on the sides there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the tip of it is cut like a feather, as you can see.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the upper end of it is a ring, because when the instrument reaches the fluid, you should immediately stop using it so that only a moderate amount of fluid is evacuated, for if you evacuate too much in one go, the patient may die from resolution of their vital spirit, or it could lead to imminent death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate it according to the strength of the patient and according to how their condition, the quality of their pulse, and their overall state indicate to you.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Here is the translation:
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	After the previous day's use, clean the instrument with water if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small amount of it from the water, and let this continue for several days out of caution, and be careful not to run out of water except in small amounts.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you are concerned about the patient, and they use a large amount of water, now bury them in fine sand and sprinkle moisture over them like bathing, and let them be exposed to the sun for a long time; and treat them with drying medicines until they are healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And apply cautery to the stomach, and treat the chest and abdomen after the extraction of water, as I have recounted in what precedes.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 55.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children who are born with unopened passages for urine.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes a child is born from the mother's womb with the head of its mixture not perforated (or it is obstructed or not in place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, as soon as the child is born, one should use a fine instrument to make a puncture for it in this manner:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then insert a fine lead needle into the obstruction and secure it, leaving it in place for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when the child needs to urinate, remove the instrument and allow urination; then return the instrument.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not insert the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over the area will not clear this obstruction.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	May that part where the wound is tight be treated with a lead nail, as we have said, for so many days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	May those in whom the wound is not in its place be treated as mentioned, and the cause of this is that which is born with the wound below the tip of the penis so that it cannot urinate normally; therefore, he raises the penis with his hand from above. And it is not for generation, because thus the sperm cannot reach the major second rectitude, and it is a chronic illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the method of the operation in this case is that the patient lies on his back, and then extend the tip of the penis with your left hand forcefully. Incise the head of the penis at the location of the foreskin with a sharp scalpel, as if cutting a feather or shaving some part so that the middle part of it resembles the head of the penis and the wound falls in its proper place accordingly.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful in your operation to stop the bleeding, as such incidents may occur; and pause at that point where you cut off the blood flow, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	On the swelling that occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and on its corruption, blackness, and adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Such occurrences often happen with this swelling in the penis and it is a chronic flesh prominence.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of these is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	For benign cases, suspend one ounce of the subtle medicine and remove all of the affected area; then apply a poultice over that cut using Egyptian plant material; afterwards, treat it with a cleansing agent until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if it is malignant and of a dark color, then you should administer cautery around the incision and at the edge of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the condition is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one part of it is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then you should remove the part that is inside at the beginning until it is healed; afterwards, treat the part that is outside, because when treating both parts simultaneously with the foreskin, there is no certainty that it will not be injured.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if blackening and corruption occur in the genitals and on the foreskin, then you should excise everything that is already discolored, as well as what is likely to become corrupted or is already corrupted; afterwards, apply a dressing over it using honey mixed with flour of scorched wheat and finely ground barley.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is bleeding, then administer lunar cautery according to this method:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because this cautery is beneficial in two situations simultaneously: it helps with bleeding and also when the condition has become corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed at that moment, then you should insert a lead cannula into the urethra so that the urine can pass through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in one whose foreskin is his, and on whom circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to disease or abscess) it must be that you scrape with a blunt spatula so that the bond may dissolve and the head of the penis may be released entirely.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to distinguish them carefully, then you must scrape with the spatula around the head of the penis and the foreskin, and this is because when the foreskin is fine, due to its fineness it can be pierced easily by its subtlety.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a fine thread, which is moistened in water and passed through so that they do not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then treat with styptic juice to ensure it is healed and consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVI.  
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the cleansing of children and the treatment of what happens to them during circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution that breaks continuity as other illnesses do; however, since it is part of our practice and our will, and because it specifically pertains to children, it is necessary to determine the best method and the least painful way for their well-being.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they do not use it in their laws. The reason is that we have acquired this through experience. For this reason, I have found most artisans and barbers to use a scalpel and scissors for circumcision and cleansing; and they use thread with cauterization with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already tried all these methods and did not find better cleansing with scissors, thread, and cauterization than in cleansing with the nail. This is because the membrane of the foreskin has two layers, and the layer beneath remains behind; thus, it forces another incision and a certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in the cleansing method performed by a surgeon, which is done with the fingers, as barbers use, there is no assurance against cauterizing the end of the male member, as it easily enters into that area.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with the nail, it is easy to err and corrupt your procedure.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and many times it is in such a way that there is no need for cleansing, and I have seen that.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	Here is the translation:
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the method of the first operation is that you should have the child lie down if it is one who understands a little, and you should only place the thread on his penis, and leave it in for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make that child happy in every way that is possible for what he receives with his intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then have that child sit between your thighs, prepared, and do not let him be afraid; and hide the scissors in your hand or place them elsewhere, so that the child does not see them or any other instrument.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into his penis and blow into the tube, and pull it in so that the head of the penis is exposed, and then clean what has accumulated there from dirt.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then tie the marked spot with thread doubly, and then tie the second ligature slightly below that one, and then press your thumb on the place of the ligature firmly below good retention, and incise between the two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then raise the tube gently and extract the head of the penis; and then let the blood flow slowly, for it is better; and apply powder above, and over the powder place a cloth soaked in honey diluted with recently prepared rose oil; and leave that on until the next day; and treat it with care until it heals.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the scissors used for cleaning is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let one pair of blades be blunt and the others cutting, so that the tip of the blade does not come out, and let the length of both sharp edges be equal to the length of two thumbs equally.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in cleansing is that you completely avoid or partially refrain from using the inherent force during incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, place the incision of your choice at the appropriate time with your scalpel before the swelling in the area and make the incision according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot have it with your scalpel, then extract it with a needle and make the incision.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed and the swelling above the joint has persisted, then leave it until the swelling subsides, and gently press it with ease, and make the incision according to what you are prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the head of the joint, for it should not be affected by this.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore, treat that with what the plague stabilizes from the powders which we have recommended in the chapter on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised too much from the vein and you follow the parts above, note that this should not be done.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And therefore, treat that as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter L VIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to stones or hardened blood clots, or pus or tumors, and similar conditions as those we have mentioned regarding methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and there is retention due to a stone that is in the neck of the bladder, then it must be that the patient is bent over his heels.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place the patient's feet on his own thighs and stretch out his abdomen from below his back, and have the patient pull his thigh as tightly as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the neck of the bladder is forced to expel the stone towards the rear parts, so that the urine can be released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if the cause of the condition we have described is not dissolved by the methods mentioned and it is severe, then you must administer extraction using an instrument called a siringua, which has the following form: It should be made of silver and be slender like a reed tube, about as thin as a sparrow's quill and half a palm long, with a fine tube at its end.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of testing the urine with it is that you take a thread doubled and tie it at one end to the lana or cotton for a good binding; then insert the ends of the thread into the lower part of the siringua, and if there is any superfluous cause from the lana, cut it off with scissors and insert it into the tube with force. Then press the siringua gently and firmly.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And have the patient lie on a chair, and elevate his bladder with olive oil and rose water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the siringua with ease until it reaches the tip of the penis; then bend the penis above its root; then push the siringua inside that; then push it in until it reaches the bladder. If this is not done in this order, but rather in a winding manner, it may cause injury.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And gradually remove the wax with the wool little by little, for the urine shrinks the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And extract that and make a cure with urine, and use a tube; do not cease to do this and use a tube until the bladder is evacuated and relief from the pain is obtained.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Regarding the quality of enema for the bladder with an enema device and similar instruments, which are appropriate for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is ulceration or an abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood in it, or when pus is obstructed and you wish to introduce water and medicines into it, then this should be done with an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	But at the end of it, it is blunt, that is its closure.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And on that part there are three grooves: two on one side, similarly on the other side.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning it is concave, in which that which is to be introduced is placed, and it should be according to the quantity needed to fill that, without addition, so that when any cause draws out the moisture, it can be drawn out, and when it is expelled, with this as well, and when it is expelled far, it acts like a clampcedra, on which naphtha is applied in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you wish to extract moisture from the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the moisture, and draw out with it the water that is introduced on the sides above, for the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then insert the extremity of the lancet into the groove as we have recommended in the circle; then apply the moisture with water that you are using, for that moisture will reach the bladder quickly, and thus relieve the patient.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the instrument with which the bladder is treated is subtle, and that is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or ivory, with the head being similar to a small feather, and below that a grooved handle.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take a bladder of the patient, and place in it the moisture that you want to instill into the bladder, and then tie it tightly between two with a strong ligature of fine twine, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then insert the extremity of the instrument into the groove.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then place your hand on the bladder with the moisture, applying gentle pressure until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you do not have access to a bladder, now take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle; and pierce that throughout its entire circumference; then insert strong thread through those holes, both ways; then attach the circle as is attached in such cases, so that you place in it the moisture that you want from various liquids, oils, and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then tie that to the instrument and proceed with it as you did with the bladder, applying pressure with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of stone extraction.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already mentioned in the division the kinds of stone and cure by medicines, and the difference between a stone generated in the kidneys and a stone generated in the bladder, and the signs of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said about the stone in which this operation is performed and its section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will proceed with that exposition clearly and concisely.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, I say that a stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and among its signs is that the urine expelled from the bladder resembles water in its fineness, but contains sand-like particles; and the patient scratches his genitals frequently, sweats in patches, and subsequently feels pain; and with these words you have been informed about it.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is easier to treat children with that condition before they reach fourteen years of age; and the treatment is difficult for older individuals.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in young adults it is somewhat easier compared to those cases.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And for the one in whom the stone is larger and the treatment is more difficult; And if it is small, the opposite is true.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, to reach the treatment of this condition, we begin by cleansing the patient with a diet that excludes everything that might prevent the expulsion of the stone due to its investigation; for this diet sometimes prevents the formation of the stone.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Here is the English translation:
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	From this side cut the skin as it is prepared, and let most of it remain attached to the things inside, so that the bladder may be made to incline toward the parts behind.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	From this side examine that and all of what is inside.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Then when you feel the stone in the space, at that moment cut it open immediately upon it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not find it immediately with your touch, then it is necessary that you anoint with oil your left index finger, if a girl, or the middle finger if a boy, and insert it into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And examine the stone until you can feel it with your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gently move it little by little into the bladder neck.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press on that with your finger and expel it towards the rear from the location of the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the assistant to press the bladder with their hand; and instruct another assistant to spread the thighs apart with one hand from behind, and with the other hand to raise the flank that is below the thighs, near the location of the incision.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then insert a spatula that has this shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and cut in the area between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle, but closer to the left side; ensure that the incision is made over the stone with your finger in the anus, and make a transverse incision so that the external part of the incision is wide and the internal part narrow according to the amount that you can easily extract from the stone, and not more, because your finger which is inside the anus presses on the stone near the incision without difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that some stones have angles and edges, because of which it is difficult to polish them smoothly.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And that one resembles a lion's paw in shape, it is round, and is made of a light and easily polished stone.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Then place that one with edges and corners into the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not forced in this way, then cover it with something over that, or press on that with a suitable tool, the end of which should be like a file used to grind stone, and do not remove it; or insert a delicate instrument with a curved end under it.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot press on that, then gently move it a little, and if you see blood flow, apply pressure to it with vitriol dissolved.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is larger than one, then at first you press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise it slightly; and then gently move it a little further; and similarly proceed if there are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then ignorance lies in cutting it with a large incision, for this causes one of two bad outcomes: either death or that it leads to continuous urine leakage, because the area does not heal completely.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer expulsion to remove it entirely, or devise a way to fracture it with forceps so that you can extract it in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with juice of aloes and dragon's blood, and press it firmly.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And pause over that cloth infused in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water, so that the abscess may yield.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then place the patient on their back, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that bandage is removed, wash the area with water and a little oil, and then treat it with chamomile ointment and St. John's wort ointment until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if an abscess occurs in the wound, which is adhibited and corrosive, and appears as though the blood is frozen in a bladder (and thus urination is prevented), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if left untreated it will cause corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with sour wine, water and salt, and with whatever other substances are appropriate for the healing process until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And throughout the entire healing process, you should cover both the wounds and adjust the medicines that are placed on the site.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the urethra, and is stuck there, and urination is prevented, then treat it with what I recommend before resorting to section, for many have been accused of excessive use of this treatment; but I advise against it, and instead suggest that you take a small sharp iron probe, which has the shape described:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a triangular tip, sharp, fixed on a handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Take some pitch, and tie it to the stem below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the stem, piercing with ease until it reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the puncturing tool with your hand on that stone little by little, and you will pierce the hole so that it allows urine to pass through from one side to the other; for the urine will soon be released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on what is broken from the stone that has come out beyond the stem, for this part is fractured and will be expelled with the urine, and thus the malady will be healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some reason that prohibits it, then tie a piece of pitch below the stone and another above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then cut into the stone on that stem between two bindings.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract that stone.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then untie the binding and clean the collected blood, which has formed around the stone.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to bind pitch below the stone except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other binding above it, because when the pitch near the swelling is untied, the membrane returns to its place and the pain subsides.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And when you bind the pitch above, it is necessary for you to raise the membrane to the upper parts, or return it gently, so that the pain subsides as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the Removal of Stones from Women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If a stone is found in any of these cases, the treatment is difficult and is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the woman is very light in her menses.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman who is honest enough to confess to the doctor whether she is chaste or has a husband.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation without a man present.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the site of the incision for removing a stone in women is far from the location of the stone, so it requires a more extensive incision, and this is dangerous.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	However, if necessity compels you to do this, then it is necessary for you to seek an honest midwife who knows well how to perform the task, but such a person is rarely found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	However, if you lack such a person, then seek a midwife who is almost honest and subtle, or present a woman who is experienced in the ways of women, or a woman who has some knowledge of this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, present that person and command them to do everything you instruct, from the examination of the stone at the beginning; the reason for this is to check if the woman is chaste, so it is necessary that they insert their finger into her back passage to locate the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Thus if you find it there, cut it below the joint, and now order him to incise on that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if it is not soft, now order the midwife to insert the finger into the patient's vagina and feel for the stone, as she places her left hand on the bladder, and compress that with good pressure.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Thus if you find it there, now proceed to gradually remove that from the opening of the bladder towards the parts below as far as its full extent until you reach the root of the matter.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then incise upon that attachment of the middle of the vagina to the root of the matter from whichever part is accessible to him and center the stone in that place, and ensure that his finger does not dislodge the stone while cutting below it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at first; then insert the probe into that section, and if you feel the stone, now adjust the incision according to the amount you know will allow the stone to be expelled from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the types of stones are varied: some are small and hard, others are sharp and rough, long and round, and having edges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Thus you should know the types of stones based on what you understand and signify about them according to what you wish to convey.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see blood flowing, apply vitriol thrice to that area for one hour until the bleeding stops, and then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	Take note that you prepare for yourself the instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of stone in men, so that you are assisted by those in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see bleeding, and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is incised, then sprinkle powder on the area and bandage it with powders and moderate pressure, and do not repeat this; and leave the stone and do not extract it, for the patient will likely die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the sharpness of the blood subsides after some days, and the area has healed, then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of the section on treating hernias.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia aquosa is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white tissue below the ring of the groin muscles, which is called a sac.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And in some cases, it is in the proper fatty layer which nature has prepared in the region of the groin, such that it appears to be another part; and the ring of the muscle is between the white sac we have mentioned, and this does not happen quickly.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the groin muscles, because this substance flows into those areas, and sometimes it happens due to impact on the groin.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture can have various colors, as its color may incline to yellowish or blood-red, or reddish, or be black and thick, or be clear and white, and the latter is better.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this collection of water is such as this: for if it is in the white skin which we have mentioned, then at that time the abscess is round inclining a little in length like the figure of an egg, and the vein appears, because the moisture extends from it on all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper subcutaneous tissue, then the abscess is round but divided like an egg, and for this reason one estimates that it is another kind of egg.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the cords of the veins and the white skin, then feel below with your finger.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then observe the color of the moisture in the abscess through a probe with which its form is preceded; and according to what is seen in the marks of the probe, judge about what is inside.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	When we come to the treatment of it with iron, then instruct the patient to be phlebotomized if that is possible for you, and apply the body of the instrument to it.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And let him lie supine on his bed on something raised slightly, and place the moistened cloth below it.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit on the left side of him, and instruct the assistant to stand on his right side, who should extend one finger along each side of the cord of the veins and at the division of the abdomen.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a broad probe and split the cord of the veins at the middle location along its length near the navel.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And let the section be made according to the rule equally distant from the line which should be under the pubic hair, until it reaches the white line including.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And scrape that area, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not injure it; and your scraping of the place which you are scraping should be done gently and carefully examine the scraping according to the quantity possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the white line with water through a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two lips of the section with hooks, and extend the white line to the parts above; and do not touch the tissue beneath the pubic hair including, and incise the white line in that manner as is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And incise that area entirely or in pieces, and especially the lateral parts finely, for if you do not examine the incision meticulously, there is no assurance that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the patient is treated outside of his tissue during the time of your operation, after you have completed the section of the white line, return inside him, and then adjust the two lips of the pubic tissue with sutures, and then treat that area as other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the patient corrupted by some other illness, then it is necessary for you to ligate the vessels which are above the suspensory ligament, remove the patient's affected part, and then treat that area as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is aggregated in two separate parts, then you will know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part as you did in the other equally; and if it appears to you that an operation is necessary, then you should perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	After you have wiped away the blood, apply wool soaked in oil or rose oil to the wounds; then place another layer of wool that has been soaked in vinegar and oil over the thighs and abdomen; cover this with folded cloths and poultices, and bind all these layers together with a bandage as follows:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Then take two cloths and fill them with shredded wool according to this pattern; make the edges so that they are pressed against the skin or dampened wool, and attach them to the structure in the breeches belt, one of the ends reaching into the buttocks, and the other at the thigh, and two extremities over each hip bone, and all the bindings should be adjusted in the waistband of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	In some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of a surgical incision; you should take a thin knife-like cautery and make an incision at the root of the groin, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white cicatrix containing the fluid becomes visible. Then take a cautery in the following form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is shaped like the Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Then pierce through that cicatrix, and ignite it until all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then extend the cicatrix with hooks and scrape it with hooks, and scrape it with a fine ignited cautery; incise as much as you can until all of it is removed; be careful that the flesh does not catch fire.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and more distant from bleeding than the dry operation.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If there is opposition to you in the form of an abscess during the time of cutting or cauterizing, or bleeding, then at those times it is necessary for you to treat whatever opposes you accordingly, with whichever treatment suits what is mentioned second.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is weak and does not dare to undergo a second operation due to its horror, then at that time administer a puncture as I recommend; and it is when you are certain, from what we have said about the signs, that that hernia is fluid.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then it is necessary for you to have the patient sit on some elevated cushion, and then puncture the abscess at the lowest part below the navel, and extend the puncture according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the incision be wide enough for all the fluid to come out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then extend over the area and ligate it there so that the remaining fluid can drain.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat it so that the wound heals.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is opposition to the evacuation of the fluid at that time, you should puncture it: and this is done only because the white fat in the wound opening opposes and prevents the discharge of the fluid. Then it is necessary for you to place in the wound a needle or instrument with which water from edematous areas is extracted, as described; or apply slight pressure around the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns, and it is kept for about five months or so; and when it has been prepared, then it should be punctured according to that same method, because in this way the patient will spend his days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the section about flesh hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the section about this hernia, there is great fear of danger in its major dispositions; therefore, it seems to me that abandoning it and being saved by that better method is preferable.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am recalling the operation on that and the specifics of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses occur in those parts where the genitals are composed, and this happens for various reasons: either due to acute and harsh excess, which is discharged into the genitals, or due to trauma.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the skin, and there is no alleviation in the pain, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And often the abscess becomes lithified, of which the color is dark, and there is no relief from it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by the entanglement of arteries, and by the inflammation of those that have already been perceived, or by the inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But what is caused by the inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersal of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and there is no need for that area to be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	May it be known that what is done by inflating a vein is not dispersed by any cause due to the compression at the site.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible to perform a section on this particular area and on other flesh; you should cut the tendon of the genitales, and nearby there will be the bowel above the parts, extract that from the white fat, deliver the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, tie them off, and cut the suspensors after you have delivered it from all sides of the parts.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Then if the bowel has already adhered to those inflamed areas and consolidated, now it is necessary for you to extract the bowel and cut it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion between any part of the fat or between what is between the vessels, now it is necessary for you to release all that adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if it is a natural growth of flesh in the place of the adhesion that is behind, now it is necessary for you to cut all that which is there and extract the bowel as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then when your operation is complete, now fill the wound with wool infused in olive oil and wine; then care for it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernias that involve the belly.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vit is an abscess enveloped by some covering similar to that around the inflammation of the testicles, and it makes difficult movement, exercise, and walking due to the ailment.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	In the treatment of this disease, one must be careful because of what preceded its remembrance.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, it should be called an operation just as they did in the beginning.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And he says that you should make the patient sit on a high stool; then lift the testicles with the fingers and place them in the scrotum; then hold those parts with your other hand and stretch them vigorously.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then cut with a sharp knife in a transverse section between the veins so that the veins are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then cauterize completely as we have said in the extraction of arteries, which are done on the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place a needle with double thread in it, and tie one end at the beginning of the places where you act, and tie the other end at the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then cut those in the middle part with a straight incision according to the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated from the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then treat the wound as you would treat other wounds where you want healing to occur, so that the veins do not cause one of the testicles to darken, for it is not harmful in this way.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if you have to act on all the veins, then it is necessary either to remove the testicles or to attach them to the veins so that they are deprived of all nutrition due to the cutting of the veins, and become atrophied, or to attach them in such a way that they do not receive any benefit from them.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter Sixty-Five.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the Treatment of Intestinal Hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that occurs below the epigastric region extended over the front part of the abdomen near the inguinal canal, because from this rupture some of the bowels enter.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the epigastric region or from its vicinity, and these two types occur for various reasons: either by impact, by jumping, by shouting, by lifting some heavy object, or by similar actions.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the epigastric region, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and not suddenly, and it appears as an abscess equal in size to what the epigastric region compresses within the bowel.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it is due to a section of the epigastric region, for at the beginning it causes a sudden and severe pain; and it appears as an abscess different from what is seen near the navel, and this is because of the displacement of the bowel, and its body extends beyond the epigastric region.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And in some cases, the peritoneum is pulled out with the bowel, and this type of intestinal hernia is called a zirbal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And in some cases, it is caused by gas, and in other cases the bowel forms a fissure, and here it is retained, and this causes great pain to the patient, and in many cases it leads to severe and worsening pain, especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of these types of this illness iron is feared, for which it must be avoided in that case.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of the operation in that case is to command the patient to hold the bandage with his hand on the parts inside his affected area if he obeys its return, and then lie down on his back between your hands, and raise his thighs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then place the incision where you will cut the cord of the testicles above, and incise the cord of the testicles entirely along its length; and then insert into the two lips of the section hooks as needed to open the section with them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section according to the quantity that it is possible for you to do so, remove it from there.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then carefully cut away the tissue around which you previously incised the cord of the testicles, until the white hard node in each part is exposed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Now insert your finger into what contains the testicle, between the white node which is behind the cord, and between the subsequent tissue, and separate any adhesions that are in the part behind the cord.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then grasp the cord of the testicles from the outside, and with this extend the white node upwards with your left hand, and lift the cord with the white node to the part of the section; and instruct an assistant to pull it upward while you dissolve any adhesions behind it completely.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And feel with your fingers to ensure that there is no part of the bandage wrapped around the white hard node.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find that there is some cause for it, then at this point you should apply that to the belly and leave it.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle with which to pierce the center of the wax, and insert it at the point where the cicatrix is below the cord of the testicles, which is now scarred; and then cut off the parts that protrude from the wax until there are four points, and then form some of them into certain shapes in the manner of a cross; and tie each of these to the cicatrix about which we have spoken as being below the cord of the testicles tightly with thread on both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the wax and tie them very tightly so that some of the vessels that nourish those parts cannot transmit any cause for which an abscess might occur from this.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And place another thread a second time parallel to the first thread, distant from it by three fingers' width; and then with these two threads leave on the cicatrix which is below the cord of the testicles a quantity equal to the breadth of a finger, and cut off all the remainder according to roundness, and remove what remains.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut into the part below the cord of the testicles in such a way that from this section blood and pus can flow as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound; and place the thread we have recommended (and sometimes the white cicatrix is cauterized, which we mentioned near the cutting to prevent blood flow, as it happens at times) and leave the thread until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the application of it is delayed, hot water should be applied, and let it remain on that part which has been injured as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And after treating the wound with the other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter lxvi.
De hernia ventosa.	Of hernia ventosa.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this type of hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has dared to treat it with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones said that it should be done as we have recommended for the hernia that is treated with heat; which is that you tie the vessels near the section in a place where it is convenient to do so; and then dry it in its proper location around the abscess that opens, until the vessels fall off.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter lxvii.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the division that is made in the glands.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	In some cases, there is a rupture in the glands as we have said, and examine the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And they do not assign any cause for the sac to the testicle; and if they do, it is rare; and it returns to normal at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged with this condition, there is a narrow passage in the scrotum through which the sac descends into the scrotum; and it occurs due to the extension of the scrotum as we have said, which causes it because the scrotum is stretched out, and then it becomes softened, and an abscess forms and needs examination.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And thus the treatment of those who are to be cauterized is as follows, after which is related the narrative concerning them.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And in some cases it is treated with an iron in this manner: the patient lies on their back with the thighs raised, and then the area of the abscess rupture is dried by section across its width according to a length of three of those mentioned.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then stretch the white cloth that is under the bandage so that it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the cautery and place it on the prominent part of the cloth, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then mark the two prominent points at the extremity of the cautery on the cloth, and join one to the other with a suture.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the end of the cautery, and do not cut through the cloth entirely, nor stretch it out, nor any other such cause as I will make you understand in the treatment of an intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat it as you would a wound, and when you cut the flaps, clean it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the cloth is contracted and not adjusted to the prominence of rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this place, for it is nearer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the bandage for the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In many cases, the bandage for the testicles is softened in certain men because the flesh that lies under it becomes softened, and this is due to careful management.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for those who are asked about the treatment to have the patient lie according to their side, and then dissect all the tissue that has been softened over the natural tissue seam; and next adjust two edges at the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, begin by removing the excess tissue that has been softened with three or four layers and then secure it with a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then dissect between the sutures; and subsequently treat other wounds until they are healed and the pus has ceased.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	On Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but for the reason it was read to me, I remember it in this book; and the remembrance of it is not necessary except by two ways, one of which is so that when asked about it, the physician knows how to treat those who are affected by it; and the other way is that we often have need of castration for certain animals for our benefit from them, such as horses, oxen, pigs, and similar beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by atrophy or by cutting and section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in the case where it is done by atrophy, the method of the operation is that we should immerse the animal in warm water until the testicles become softened and are suspended.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand until they become soft and do not appear to be hard upon touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	Here is the English translation:
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Regarding the suspenders, and incise on each side such that two parts proceed from it.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And incise those boils which you have drained of their contents.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not apply anything to those of the spleen except for subtle medicine which is for the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better, which is done by cutting, because cutting thoroughly removes any cause from the testicles for the animal to desire copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then treat the plague until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphrodism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphrodism in men occurs in two ways: one is when there appears in that space between the chain of testicles, between two testicles, a figure resembling a female vulva, where hair also grows.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And in some cases, that part where urine is emitted is located in the chain of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, there is a special case: the female organ above the pubis appears as two testicles of a man slightly raised towards the inside, like the scrotum of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	It is necessary for you to incise those tight tissues until the pus drains out, and then treat them as you would other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second species of men who have urine that is in the cord of the testicles, there is no cure or operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On lancing and on flesh protruding due to causes of women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Lancing is properly performed based on natural causes, considering the condition and making an appropriate incision; and in some cases, it is exaggerated in women to such a degree that it spreads as it does in men and penetrates during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then you should have the excess of lancing done by your hand or by an inch and incisions.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not stop at the incision, especially at the root of the vein, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then treat that with the cure for wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	But hidden flesh is flesh that arises in the navel of the mother and fills it, and lightly it spreads to the parts outside like a tail (and for this reason some early writers called this "tail disease"); therefore, we should incise it as we would lance, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	On the treatment of scrotal hernia.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Scrotal hernia is when the genital part of a woman is not perforated, or the passage is small. 
E es o natural o accidental.	It is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to a previous illness, and that is caused either by flesh poorly joined or by a thin or thick channel.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is done either in the region of the major artery, or in its sides, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it, and you must prohibit cooking, intercourse, and childbirth, and somewhat less menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the diagnosis of that is made by examination with the speculum, if the obstruction is apparent, proceed quickly; but if it is not apparent, then inquire about it with your questions or with the light.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to a thin channel and it is close to both lips, then you should cut and disrupt that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you should place cotton pads over both lips, and then apply your diagnostic techniques from the most intimate areas.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should lie on her back, with her legs spread, and then stretch both lips forcefully so that the thin channel is cut and the obstruction is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and soak it in oil and place that on the location, and have a man hold it there for as long as necessary to ensure the cut area is consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the channel is thick and dense, then you should cut that with a scalpel or with a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to flesh, then suspend that for a moment, and cut it open.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	Here are the medicines that stop blood flow from a bite, such as hachyatia, dragon's blood, and enses, mixed with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And immediately apply a wide lead tube so that the wound does not heal too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep it like that for several days and apply dry sponges.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it should be treated with the other method of healing until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And in some cases, similar accidents occur in the larger birth of other tissues, and at these times it is necessary to incise them according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if this is due to a chronic abscess, the chronic abscess in the larger part should not be treated with any kind of iron in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids and similar conditions that occur in the female genital area.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are an appreciation of the openings of small veins, through which blood flows continuously; and when these old hemorrhoids are formed, they become hard.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already mentioned in the division the types of these and the signs of them, and to say which of these receive treatment and which do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and hard lumps when they are near the opening of the larger part and do not appear to the touch, then in these no treatment with iron should be done.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	May those things be removed which are in the opening of the wound upon which one feels pain, for they must be cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And when you put the woman in a bath, cleanse and prepare the area with scissors or rough cloth, and cut away those parts with the razor.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder should be sprinkled on those areas that bleed from one of the powders used for cutting, such as acacia and similar substances.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then press the poultice onto them for an hour, and then place it in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding persists, then make a decoction of sumac and rind of lemons and pomegranate peels and similar ingredients.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of barley and mix it with honey and sour wine to make a plaster to apply over it.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the bleeding has stopped, that is good; but if not, apply it to both sides, and at the nipples with scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and soak it in the juice of coriander or dill or galbanum in sour wine, and apply it to the area; and afterward treat the area with ointments until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	When you remove the hair that is rough and hard to deal with, make sure to cut it according to what I have said previously, in the same manner.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And treat that area until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the Incision of an Abscess Accidentally Made in the Belly.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various kinds of abscesses occur accidentally in the belly, such as stone and gravel abscesses, ulcers, boil-like abscesses, hemorrhoids, fistulas, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already mentioned these ailments and their kinds and the signs of them, and their treatments in division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And what I say in this treatise about abscesses that occur in the belly when they are caused by illness is how the operation should be performed. If you want to know in what manner it is done, follow along.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then you should consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and if it appears red and feels hot to the touch, then do not perform an incision on it, and treat it in such a way that aids in maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms subsides.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And now you should have the woman lie on a cushioned surface with two cushions; let her recline on her back and place her legs elevated below the waist, and spread out her arms below her elbows, and bind them with bandages as is appropriate.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife should stand at the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the belly will be made, the form of which will be described in these cases.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you wish to administer this instrument, you should place it along the line of the navel of the woman, and what is inserted into the belly with the instrument should not exceed the circumference of the navel and the extent of the ailment.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the opening of the largest wound, then it is necessary that you place padding over the tissue of the largest wound so that the entry of any instrument into the largest wound is prevented.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And it is necessary that you place the lubricant that flows from the instrument on top and that the assistant hold the instrument while rotating the lubricant within until the opening of the largest wound is sufficiently covered.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the wound appears and is touched by hand and is inflamed and moist, it is necessary that you dry it with a piece of linen.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated, it is necessary that you place on the wound a piece of cloth submerged in rose oil or green oil in which there is some astringency; and apply the poultice to the dried area around the largest wound.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place over the largest wound and on the bandage a piece of clean wool submerged in water in which mallows have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And it should be treated appropriately for about two days until the moment comes when you consider it appropriate to do so for its healing.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the wound and the dressing are washed in this way that it is cleansed with water and honey, and then in water in which lily root or long-leaved arum has been boiled, and then returns to its dressing.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the dressing is deeply embedded in the inflamed wound, then it is necessary that you refrain from removing it with force, instead caring for it as we have described in the section.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives in what manner living embryos are treated when they appear abnormal according to nature.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of natural childbirth by signs of light, and it is that when you see the woman strain in labor and desire to breathe the air, and she is elated by what is above her during birth, and hastens the delivery of the embryo, then you know that this birth is according to a natural figure, and it is the emergence over its head first, and the second part hanging from the navel or suspended below it.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	When you see those signs, then it is necessary to compress the abdomen so that the embryo descends gently, for when it emerges with its head first, the second part will follow, and it should be cleaned of those superfluities by proper cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But if it is another way than this birth, it is unnatural and not praiseworthy, for when the embryo emerges on its buttocks and the body of it emerges before the head and the feet, or one hand, or the other foot first, or the head and one hand, or to the belly, and quickly turns over on its neck, resembling the figures that are not praiseworthy.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those matters and to guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I show all the figures of those births, and which type of birth is in them so that it may be understood by this and stand upon this.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus is delivered with its head first by natural effort, and it is strenuous for the woman and the birth is difficult, and you see her strength already weakened, then let this be done, or let women have it, and evaporate the condiment of fenugreek seed and olive oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Insert the probe between the spaces of the small incision and split it with the second instrument, or moisten that with its tip so that you can see what is inside due to moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's abdomen so that the contents descend.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not descend, now cover the woman with a mixture of feather dust and fenugreek paste.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command him, in front of the witnesses, to be firmly pressed and make him sneeze forcefully; and hold his mouth and nose for one hour, because the contents will come out immediately.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both parts of the contents come out at the beginning, now you should reduce them to ease little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if he does not obey the instrument, now place the woman on a cushion and lift her legs up, then strike the cushion on the ground; and hold the woman so that she does not fall due to the impact.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the parts are not returned and the contents are dead, now incise them and extract the dead fetus or tie the body to his hand with a cloth and pull it out gently, as it will come out.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	And lift the embryo up towards the thighs.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the contents are above the thighs, now you should push them upwards, and then turn the fetus little by little, and then align it, and then take hold of it part by part and extend it slowly.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When dust has entered the eyes, at that moment you command him to squeeze them, and cause him to sneeze with conditions, for it will be expelled if God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not expelled by what we have recommended, then you return the treatment little by little until you pause at the second figure of nature, for it will now be expelled easily and quickly.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited by all that we have recommended, then take musellage of hart's tongue and dissolved gum, and mix them thoroughly in the mortar with good pounding, and afterwards apply it to the skin of a woman, the softer part below the navel.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And afterwards have that person sip hot water, until it reaches the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the lower parts of his body are sufficiently healed, then perform a fumigation with myrtle and allow him to rest.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the sub-fumigation lasts for one hour, then have him sit on a chair, and afterwards cause him to sneeze and clean his mouth, and take him away, and press the lower part of his abdomen gently, for the treatment will quickly be expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Sneeze the substance out through his teeth and his mustache.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the substance is expelled in this manner, then you should gently pull on his mustache little by little; and afterwards have the woman lie on top of his neck, with her feet hanging down, and she should sit on him, and comb his mustache.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press on the child's abdomen little by little, and then extract what is below the ears to prepare it in the place behind the posterior.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the expulsion does not occur, now take the feet and move them vigorously, and then press what is above the hypochondria little by little until the stool can come out from above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert your fingers and mix the stool little by little, and instruct the woman to strain until the stool is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Also pass the stool laterally while using one of your fingers.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Be cautious in reducing the hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and let it go.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if it cannot be released, then make her lie down on the bed, and strike her back vigorously with blows, and then administer liniments which I use and recommend for soothing.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if labor has begun, then make her sit on the birth stool, and then proceed with the reduction of the hand, and mix the stool according to its natural form, and make the woman sneeze and instruct her to strain until it is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Also pass the stool over the thigh using your fingers and the cloth that is at her side.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Let the midwife hold the stool and then rotate it little by little, and facilitate its passage.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when and how it is mixed, then pause on the area around the anus with what we have recommended of oil and liniments.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Here is the translation:
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The outcome of the prepared fetus on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you intend to treat the horror of the major according to this method, consider it, and then incise the second one with your finger so that it is evacuated of the humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of it, then you incise that of the umbilicus, so that it is not retained and dies.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then push the fetus into the parts inside until you place that which is needed, and instruct the woman to compress herself several times, and the blood will be quickly expelled if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The outcome of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are usually born in several stages, and sometimes three or four are born at once, but this is rare and happens slowly; however, these causes are from nature, not from life.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And among those, whether they are multiple, make a second incision, and separate them by the cleft, distinguishing each one along the ligament at the umbilicus of each. Sometimes they come out in several stages as if it were a single fetus by natural means quickly, and sometimes they come out in several stages in an unseemly manner as we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some of them are difficult to deliver during childbirth and you reach what we have said about the unnatural figures, then you treat those as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does what she does with ease and skill, and acts promptly or cautiously as needed, according to every figure as it is prepared for childbirth, leading to a safe outcome.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	A reminder of what is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarried.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some weeks are formed in the mother one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and rarely more than ten, and you should already be convinced that a woman aborts at the sixth week, and another at the tenth week, which cause was made known through measurement by the glorious wise men.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this should be known by the midwife because it is very easy for her to recognize these things, and therefore she should act accordingly as what is necessary.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus as we have said in the division of the treatment and it is not yet expelled, and you are forced to use operative methods, then you must consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and is not affected by any of the conditions for which her safety is feared.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Now the woman should be placed on her back on the bed with her buttocks raised and her hips elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the attendant should hold her by both legs or tie her to the bed so that her body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then moisten the mouth of the birth canal with oils and a mixture of honey, fenugreek, and linseed seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and mixtures, and then gently insert her hand into the birth canal, and then search with her hand for the position of the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	In suitable places: then you should consider whether the operation is to be performed on their head; and at that time you place the hooks in the ears or neck, or mouth, or palate, or beard, or clavicle, or proper regions of the ribs, or hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the operation is to be performed on their feet, then place the hooks in the pelvis, or middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is necessary that you hold the hook in your right hand, and place the curvature of it at the location between your left fingers, and insert it with ease into one of those places we have mentioned, until it reaches the affected area.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And properly place and fix in position another hook, or a third if necessary, so that there is equal traction, and not extension according to its straightness alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And it should be gentle in all parts, so that the extraction of it is eased as is done during the process of tooth extraction.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is necessary between those parts that the extension be softened; and if any part is held back, then it is necessary for the midwife to anoint some of the mentioned areas with oil and insert them carefully and rotate what is held back.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if a part of the fetus is exposed, at that time the hooks should be moved to the place where it is easier; and do this until the entire fetus is delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if one hand is extended in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to the contraction of it, then it is necessary for a cloth to be wrapped around that part; and subsequently extract that part until all of it is delivered, and incise it either at the joint of the hand or at the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And so do this on the other side and on both sides.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the swelling is large, or if it happens during the compression, or if it is in the head of the tight dressing, then you should insert between the aforementioned spined spatula and cut open the head to drain the liquid, or use an instrument called "alundat," the shape of which will be among the forms of other instruments near this chapter.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And do the same if the swelling has a large head by nature: then you should incise it with some material, or use the alundat as we have said; and near there, grasp the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is swollen and compressed behind the clavicle, then it should be cut open so that the moisture which is in the tissues can drain.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated and does not lead to swelling, then you should incise the head as soon as possible according to what seems best to you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the lower part of the abdomen is abscessed or is in a hydroptic condition, then you should puncture it so that the moisture within can drain.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the swelling is on both sides, then the attraction of it is slight and the direction toward the mouth of the urethra is also slight.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is compressed behind the abdomen and tissues, then you should drain that with a cloth wrapped around your hand, and cut open the abdomen and tissues so that the fluid within can flow out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other members remain and only the head needs to be turned, then place your left hand in between; but if the mouth of the patient is open, then place your hand on their chin, and circle around with that so as to bring the head into the mouth of the patient, and then insert one or two fingers there.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the patient is obstructed by an abscess that occurs on it, then it should not be pressed upon it; rather, it is necessary to administer humid and greasy applications.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Administer plasters; and have the patient use waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the abscess is on their side, then if possible, it should be lanced: and what we have said about treating a live abscess should be administered.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And it is necessary not to leave any cause inside the second incision.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your entire operation, then administer what we have said about treating abscesses that occur in the mouth.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs, then apply styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman in whose abdomen there was a dead fetus, and subsequently on top of that another pregnancy, and then the other fetus was also dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	An abscess occurred in the side of the navel after some time; it became swollen inside with a hard lump, and began to emit pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	This is from the care for him, and he treated him for a long time, and the plague was not cured.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then he applied to him plasters of strong attraction, and he extracted one bone from him, and after some days, he extracted another bone; and he was very amazed, as there was no other bone in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then he thought that they were bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then he questioned the illness, and extracted from him twelve bones, the woman having in her belly disposed in certain positions, and already saw in such a way for a long time, corrected him a little of his arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And he did not consider it strange, but because in this there is science and helpers for what the surgeon craftsman does with his hand for treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of a spiral in which the largest is at the base:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a stretcher on which he equalizes the limbs, to this equalization there are two spirals at the two extremities of two threads.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this spiral should be finer than wire and should be made of reed or wooden stick.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each stick should be two fingers, and the margin on each side should be one finger, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle of two sticks there are two adjustments of the same type of wood that are already fixed, whose length is half a palm plus a little more, and the width of each is two fingers or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	From these two additions, insert them into the mouth of the mother so that they are open to them when you turn the two prescribed screws.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Form another one similar to that one, but finer and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It should be made of ebony wood or boxwood according to the similarity of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the end of each of those two additions as you see fit, and the length of those additions is about one palm, and the width of each is two of those.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother with those, then you have her lie on the bed with her feet hanging down, opening what is between her legs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open it with your hand using the instrument as you do with forceps, equally according to the amount that you want of the opening of the mother's mouth until the metrona does what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of the screw which the ancients called:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of the propeller with which the deed is pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of the supporter with which the large head is held
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps, at the end of which there are teeth as you see fit, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as you see fit, with these teeth like the teeth of a saw with which it is cut and held.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of a small supporter:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Shape of a joint having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Shape of a joint having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Shape of forceps in which the closing teeth are designed to contain the head of the fetus:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Shape of a spatum having two extremities at which the head is divided:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Shape of two broad spatulae:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when more of each type is needed, the varieties of them should be prepared by the artisans, as it is easier for their operation and better for people in terms of quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you should prepare any of those instruments, whichever is needed, because the necessity for them is unavoidable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of the extraction of the afterbirth.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the afterbirth is retained after childbirth, you should instruct the woman to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze under certain conditions. Place your hand over her mouth and nose, and if it comes out this way, that is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if it does not come out, take a decoction and pierce the cover of it. Place this on the woman's mouth as a poultice using herbs such as chamomile, rue, anise, camomilla (chamomile), Arabian scammony, cassia lignea, and saffron.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All of these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water to make the decoction, and then place this over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Place a reed tube in the mouth of the mother, and keep it there so that the vapor reaches the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make her sneeze as we have said, and the second time it should come out quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this cure does not work and it is retained, then you instruct the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or mace of altea, and then insert it into the womb and feel for the second object. When you have found it, gradually extract it little by little. If it is stuck near the opening of the mother, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you find the second object, remove it bit by bit according to what seems right so that the mother does not fall due to violent attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Also ensure that it is moved from side to side with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of traction, for it will obey and avoid adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed, we have already recommended the cure through sneezing and medication with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it does not come out despite all the causes we have recommended, then be careful not to tire her with repeated attempts at extraction. Instead, ensure that what is expelled reaches the mouth of the mother and then treat it with a concoction and tetrapharmacon; for this will cause it to rot over several days and dissolve, allowing it to come out.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it rots, it causes severe odor at the head and in the stomach, and this gives you the illness; then it is necessary to administer appropriate fumigations and remedies for this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	May we consider the opinion of the Ancients, who assert that fumigation with nitre and dried figs is effective.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of the instrument with which a woman is fumigated due to the retention of menstruation and for secondary conditions:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of copper or iron.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the finer end should be placed in the vagina and the wider end above the fire, and the fumigation should be placed among the embers of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep it inside until that fumigation is consumed and repeat it with another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	For the treatment of an infant's unopened anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Some infants are born with their anuses not perforated, which are small and closed.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that opening with her finger; and if not, she should pierce it with a sharp probe, being careful not to touch the membrane.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then place over that lint soaked in wine and oil; and afterward, treat it with a poultice until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it is closed, then place a cannula for several days, and remove it when the infant needs to pass gas.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it may happen that the anus is closed due to the consolidation of an abscess or swelling; then it is necessary to incise that consolidation, and afterward treat it as we have said regarding treatment with lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of the treatment of fistulas that arise from hemorrhoids.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that arise in the area of hemorrhoids with pus, are hard and thick, which arise near the anus or in the space between one part.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is either one fistula or multiple.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And as that hardness becomes old and runs with watery white moisture or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulas are superficial, while others penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known by what is emitted from them through discharge and swelling; and sometimes the nature of their discharge reveals their true condition, and it is easily discerned.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And sometimes these fistulas extend into the space penetrating towards the bladder, and into the urethra; and some of those that penetrate reach the joint of the spine and into the bone marrow.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And to distinguish a penetrating fistula from one that does not penetrate, you should insert your finger into the anus, and gently introduce a thin probe of iron or wood into the fistula when there is no turbulence.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is turbulence, then gently insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair into the fistula until you feel the probe or hair with your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel anything with your finger and there is no discharge or swelling or ventilation as we have said, then you know that it is non-penetrating, and now proceed to the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the shaft of the penis, then its significance is such that urine comes from there and it prohibits doing anything to it until the place in medicine becomes consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then the sign is that pus can be felt here if there is not a twist within the bone, and pain in the circuit of the affected part; and that it will be purulent at all times; and that this treatment does not help in such cases, nor is consolidation possible without incision.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no certain cure, and the cure for those is the labor and vanity of many physicians, upon which they rely firmly.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in the one that is not penetrating and not old, healing with proper treatment is hoped for, as I will tell you, and what has been beneficial to me.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your thighs with his back on them and you raise the limbs of him inside, the thighs should be inclined toward the belly of him, and immediately insert a probe of lead or iron if there is a twist in the fistula, until you know where the probe penetrates.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient complains of pain around the anus, then you should immediately insert your finger into the anus.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel with your finger that the probe can easily penetrate on its own, or what you feel between your finger and the sinus or flesh is easy to pass through, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not work on it, for there is no cure in such cases, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, someone might say that it is safe in some men quickly.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the treatment by which help is hoped for in there, you should cauterize subtly according to the size of the fistula, as was mentioned before, and insert that heat into the fistula until it goes around the bowel; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those inflamed tissues around the fistula are tightly closed, like the quill of a bird.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then treat that with bandages wrapped in boiled cloth until all those tissues that are closed heal, and then treat that with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh, and if it heals, good; and if not, it will never heal by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters and does not penetrate into the part where the diseased tissue is located, and there is a membrane of flesh or cicatrix between that part and the probe, and place the fistula in something that dries the surface of the bowel; then dry the bowel from the beginning of the fistula, and you see drying both with the probe, and it should be placed in the fistula until the drying reaches the place where the tip of the probe reaches, and through this, it is relieved and cured.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then cleanse those tissues that are closed and resemble the quill of a bird's feather, without damaging any of them.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	However, if blood flows between you and your operation when you are dealing with those tissues, then the best remedy for that and for pus is to cauterize with fire or with a sharp medicine, because cauterizing with fire has two good effects: it closes the closed tissues, and stops the bleeding by drying out the moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	In the treatment of those with bandages wrapped around joints or compressed deeply within that place where movement is restricted, and immediately afterward treat the swelling caused by hard growths which are generated and consolidate.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And in those medicines which have styptic and drying properties; when the wound is restored, it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already penetrated to the rectum and is extended below the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and investigate it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And so if you feel the tumor and between you and it there is only a membrane of tissue or skin, and it is close to penetration, then do not operate on it but proceed by faith and with hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	This cause should be administered in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry it out until you achieve the necessary contraction so that you can introduce instruments and proceed with proper treatment; do not proceed to cutting unless absolutely necessary, for fear of injuring the vessel containing blood, nor act rashly against the patient's wishes without due consideration. Then treat it with what we have mentioned as a means of healing; or lengthen that membrane and cleanse the pus by drying it out near the anus, as we have said, either with your hand or another sharp instrument, then clean the diseased flesh through section where you can reach with perforation; and strive to restore the entire wound through section, and if the upper opening does not consolidate, leaving a fistula open in the region of the rectum, it will be easier for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you introduce your finger into the fistula, and it is located on the side of the rectum near the surface of the body along its margin, then use an instrument with a perforated tip, which is like a needle used to prepare flax, in this way:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	Then mix in that faithful envelope of five feathers or around those; and immediately mix in a bit of honey into the fistula until it achieves the consistency desired.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	If it penetrates near the margin of the anus inside, now you extract the contents of that tract as if you were putting your finger into the anus; and pull out the extremity of the feather and tie both ends firmly, and keep this for one or two days, and when you then incise the contents in the flesh, secure it well so that those parts of the flesh which lie between the two ends of the feather may heal.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then treat the wound until it is healed and consolidated.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the openings of the fistula are not penetrable, then make it penetrable in whatever manner you have prepared, but do so gently without forcing it, lest you incise the artery; and then treat it until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the probe with which the fistula is incised: its curvature should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other, so that you do not cut what is unnecessary, as sometimes happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Regarding the stitching of hemorrhoids in which blood flows during the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids occur in two ways: either around the anus like coal lumps, or they appear as grape-like clusters.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those that are small and large, and from which blood flows constantly, whether they are single or multiple, and whether inside or outside the anus, and at the extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are only in the area of little moisture, where yellow water or a little blood comes out continuously, and according to the color of the skin.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for those that are inside the skin is to order the patient to sit down and compress until the skin becomes pale and the veins appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you cover it and suspend hooks or what you have with your nails, and then cut those that are their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	However, if you do not have hooks due to the humidity and softness of them, then take rough cloth or a comb or wool fluff, and pull them out with your fingers, and then cut them and powder some hot powders near the incision, so that it serves as cauterization for them; or cauterize them as was described in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then treat them with other methods until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the skin does not obey evacuation, then blister the patient with a blister that has a small bite, and wash it with the water that is in the skin so that it obeys quick evacuation when the patient is compressed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	However, if the hemorrhoids are outside the skin, then their cause is simple, and you should take them with your nails or with hooks, and cut them, and then treat them as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for those who require suturing, you should administer it in this manner: take fine thread wrapped around a needle and then pull the hemorrhoid out at the top part, and make the thread penetrate with the needle into the root on the other side, and wrap both ends of the thread below the needle horizontally; and tighten the hemorrhoid firmly with the structure, and then knot the thread and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	In this way in all of them, and leave one of those without stitching it up, so that the excess blood can flow from that one.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place on top of the cloth infused in rose oil or wax; and place that on the wound and instruct the patient to rest upon it.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave that inside the cavity; and when it is closed, treat those with dressings or other treatment until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Often, accidents occur due to the splitting of a fissure or constriction by nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they are old and do not respond to that medicine, now you should shave those with the point of a scalpel or your fingernail until they become moist and allow the pus to drain from them, which prevents their consolidation; and then treat them until they have healed.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Now you should remove those with more forceful shaving of the pus than the first time until they bleed and are scraped; and then treat them until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the treatment of almesamir, which is a key condition.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that almesamir, which is a key condition, appears as red spots similar in color to the body but resembles the head of a nail, and it occurs throughout the body but more frequently below the waist and in those areas, causing pain in those places.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Then it is necessary to incise what is around the key area, and hold it with pliers or forceps, and eradicate it from its root; and then treat that area.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize the one that is mentioned next in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	But a warty mole is a small, rough, fistulated, round prominence on the surface of the body, and spots like this appear in most children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment for it is to extend and incise that mole, or to remove it with a knife or a cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize that area as we have said, with fire or with an acute medication.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And now they are eradicated, both directly and indirectly, with the instrument of which I spoke.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	But a mole is a small, feathered or thickly fistulated prominence on the surface of the body without pain, and when touched, it feels like an ant bite, and it is formed around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment for it is to take a needle tube made of eagle feather or vulture feather, and let it be strong, and place that on the mole so that it covers the circumference of the tube around it; then rotate your hand with the tube so that you incise what is within the circuit of the mole, and place it in the pain of the flesh, and thus eradicate the mole from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do this with a tube made of horn or iron in the following manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the upper part of the tube be sharp, but not perforated, wrapped in such a way that when held by the finger, it feels smooth and allows for easy rotation.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the ant as mentioned above in the cautery of atīl in the chapter on cauteries.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	About the shape of the instruments that you administer to cauterize.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes it is made of silver or lead or molten and hammered gold; and sometimes it is made of those instruments large and small according to those to whom you administer them, for that which is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and of those whose anus is sensitive or painful, their cauterizers should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of the large and few cauterizers:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the silver tube above, to which the bag is tied, should be wide according to this method; and it should be at a distance where the bag is tied just as you see.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the lower end of the tube, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (that is, not open) like a lion's tail, tapering subtly; and on one side of it there are two grooves, and on the other side one groove, and the width of the groove should be according to the thickness of the rays, slightly smaller.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines are placed should be made of animal bladder or sheep's wool, and the length of it should be one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be perforated with threads as it is twisted; and the space between the threads should be as thick as a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those threads strong vinegar made from raw honey, or around them; and tie the bag securely to it; and when you place the bag on it, it should be tight at the head of the cautery between two distinct tight bindings, and immediately cauterize each thread. However, the quality of cauterizing with it is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the quantity the patient can tolerate; and be careful not to make it too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Let the patient lie on their back, and raise his buttocks with something beneath him such as a cushion or a pillow; then anoint the tip of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or similar substances; then insert it gently into the anus; and the attendant should take the bag and squeeze it vigorously between two hands until all that is in the rectum has been evacuated; then remove the instrument from the rectum, and let the patient lower his buttocks to the side.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine induces it to evacuate, let him hold it as long as he can; and if he sleeps with it throughout the night, it is better for the relief.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you treat him for intestinal disorders and the evacuation of the bowels with the cautery, then continue using the cautery until he is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a gentle and soft catheter, one such as is used for children's enemas.
De curacio de las plaguas.	On the treatment of plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already stated in the division of the treatment of plagues what was suitable for the book, and I will now describe the treatment of those with medicine according to the completion.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that plagues are diverse according to how the plagues are caused and according to the location where the plagues occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which plagues often occur are such as stone formation, or incision by a sword or knife, or striking with a spear, or with a stick, or with an arrow, or similar to those from various causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Here are the plagues that are in the parts of the body such as the plague which attacks the head, the neck, the feet, the belly, the groin, and similar ones in the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the treatment of certain plagues, so that you pause that reasoning and rule over other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple plagues of the head, for the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, I say that when you encounter a simple plague in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a stone or something similar and only the skin has been broken, making it a large swelling and you fear there may be an abscess underneath, at this moment you should take action and perform phlebotomy on the cephalic vein immediately, without delay; and extract as much blood from that area according to the quantity of the strength required unless some reason prevents phlebotomy, especially if the blood coming out of the wound is minimal.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And let the phlebotomy be from the opposite side of the affected area; and keep the patient from overeating and from heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some reason prohibits phlebotomy, then reduce the patient's food intake and do not allow meat or rich foods.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause concerning the plague, if an abscess forms underneath it; then apply rose oil alone or in a substance that has been stypticized.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if you are sure of an abscess underneath, then pause concerning the plague, especially if it is fresh with its own blood and the air has not changed the powder that I recommend to apply in small amounts.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the weather has already changed that, then pause for some time until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	And if the wound is large or due to a wound with similar characteristics and the lips of the wound cannot be approximated by simple means, then approximate those using sutures as I will describe regarding the suturing of such wounds.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	And if the wound is already exposed to the bone and deeper structures and there is no need for retention but only a small suspensorium, then incise it and treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in place of the granulation tissue, and instruct the patient to eat foods that are nutritious: meat, fish, and similar foods until he is well-composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the granulation tissue and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all of that necrotic tissue and remove it, and subsequently treat it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	And if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flow can occur and it does not coagulate with medicines, then inquire about the artery, and if you find that unincised, then incise that with a scalpel, or ligate that; and if necessity provokes that what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize until the bleeding is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is minor; therefore, you can powder those with this powder, as it will consolidate them before the weather changes.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method for the powder is as follows: take oil of sesame one part, blood of dragon two parts, and burnt copper three parts; mix all thoroughly and sieve it, and fill the wound with it, and secure it with good compression so that it adheres well to the wound, and let it coagulate with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	From above the wound apply plasters and let that remain there, and do not remove it while it is still such that it has not become inflamed, for medicine does not reach it until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes this cure is used alone when it is not at hand the juice and blood of the dragon.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And now this method of operation is used for large wounds when it is necessary to place upon them and narrow them, and on fresh wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially when it is in summer, then there is no intention to apply this powder, but at that time cure those with what we have mentioned, namely placing upon them some cold applications or placing upon them flour of barley with water and honey until they begin to decay; and then cure those with the other treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if it happens with the wound that there is a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you extract it with a probe.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will describe the treatment of fractures of the head in what follows.
De las plaguas del col.	Of wounds to the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and between a simple wound of the head.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery is severed, then if it is a nerve, there should be no immediate treatment but rather avoid any care that causes strong contraction, such as zinc ore and similar substances that injure nerves and contract them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	Do not hesitate about any cause of worry, for the substance of the nerves is connected and continues to the brain, which is the source of all parts of the body.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if this is what is meant by being treated with gentle medicines, such as being washed with warm water, sometimes infused in roasted or unroasted oil, and then dried when washed with warm water, along with other mineral substances prepared in this manner, and they find moisture.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is severe, then administer stitches, or close its edges, and afterwards treat it with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound is deep or if there is an abscess in the lowest part of it, then pierce that area at the most depressed point.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if an artery is already cut in the wound and bleeding occurs, then separate or stop that bleed, or tie that off, or cauterize it if necessity requires such action.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the neck or the entire spine have already been cut, and only the veins of the neck remain intact, then you should approximate the edges of the wound with sutures over the bones of the neck without touching them; instead, align them and reduce them to their natural position, and then support it with appropriate structure for several days; afterwards, treat it with powders that have astringent and excitatory properties until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has already formed a callus in the bone, then percuss that area, and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all you can from them; and what is not accessible to you, leave it until the wound suppurates, and the exudate separates, easing the swelling.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle over it the powder which has been recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if a fistula is formed in the wound, then treat it with the liquid whose description will come shortly in its proper chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of wounds to the neck or similar ones that are made between the shoulders, whether by a sword, knife, lance, or similar weapon.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a thrust from a lance or knife, and you feel the depth of it, then consider whether there is swelling when the injured person lies down; at that point, you will know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth to it and the wound is fresh with its own blood, then in the first hour apply powder to it, but do not press it so that the blood does not remain trapped within its depth and return to the heart, causing harm; rather, apply a drawing remedy, and change it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the remedy is not at hand, then place a piece of cloth over the wound to absorb the moisture that comes from it; and have the injured person lie on the wound so that what is contained within can flow out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed since the wound occurred and no spasms, tremors of the heart, or constriction of breath have happened to the injured person, and you observe other good signs from it, then you know that the wound is safe; at that point, treat it with dressings and other proper care until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if healing of it is delayed and a long time has passed, then you know that a fistula has formed; treat it therefore according to its proper chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is from a razor or knife and is simple on the surface of the skin, then treat it as would be done with stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if it has already caused damage to the bone and some pieces are exposed from the incision, then you should turn the wound and try to extract those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then leave them inside until the wound heals, because their removal is difficult.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other wounds in the other limbs, the treatment in healing is as we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the wounds of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The injury that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, slight, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	In severe cases, you may encounter the bowel or its nerves, because there is an intrusion of them and the stitching of them must be more vigorous and more precise.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is difficult to handle by other means, and it should be noted that the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not carefully return them to their place immediately, as they tend to harden and swell, making the instrument for their manipulation difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore, the best injury is moderate, for in that case it is not difficult to reduce the bowel, whereas it is difficult in both of the previous types mentioned.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you should know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two types of stitching are common and suitable for sutures of other wounds on the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	Of two other sutures proper communicate with other wounds, but however more in the suture of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you each exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the wound is small and it is caused by some reason in the intestine, and it becomes difficult to reduce that, then there are two ways: either because of the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when the intestine has become inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when that is so, then it is necessary for you to warm that in such a way that you submerge a sponge or cloth in lukewarm water alone, or soak it in hot water with cyperus and spica, and apply it to the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes I use that which has styptic properties, and it is better than water alone for resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see the inflammation resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which honey and mallows have been steeped, for by this the instrument of pain is alleviated slightly.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the instrument of pain persists near this cure, then you should divide the rupture slightly with an instrument on which hemorrhoids have been cut.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better, when it is proper that there be no cutting, and it should not be necessary to dry out due to urgency and deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, this is its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the sharp end of the probe, and the other part not sharp, and the tip subtle, and not as fine as a needle point, but somewhat blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And thus when the wound is enlarged and the edges are separated from the fascia, now it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible, for this is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is wide and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, now you must make the patient lie on his back, and place his arms closer to his head than usual; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you place his head and feet higher than the rest.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two sides of the abdomen, now you must constantly direct your attention and consideration so that the part where the wound is lies higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you should administer this for both large wounds and smaller wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And for small wounds, prepare what is necessary, and then have your most skilled assistant do this, who should hold the wound with their hand and approximate the lips of it, and then proceed to suture it carefully.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or a needle holder according to the quantity and amplitude of the wound; then lay the end of the needle between your ring finger and little finger, and tighten the needle so that you do not put thread at both ends of the suture, but rather between the two ends of the edges inside the wound, until it penetrates from one side; and once you have brought together the two ends of the suture and the two ends of the tissue, this makes four knots.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Take a needle with double thread and pass it through the wound on both sides, then bring together the two lips of the wound by sewing them up properly; then let go of your finger and put another needle in that one, and again tie this needle just as you did the first; and do not stop doing this until you have completed the whole stitching of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of medium fineness between coarseness and subtlety, for fine needles pierce the flesh too quickly; and thick ones are difficult to insert into the tissue, and thus it is best that they be of medium fineness and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not good for the needle to be inserted at both ends of the tissue simultaneously, because this causes the flesh to be pierced too quickly and allows the wound to separate before it has consolidated.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not extend the stitches too far so that the wound is not hindered from consolidating.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not cause irritation under the dressing; and place powder spread around the stitches, which will cover the ends of the needles; and leave them in until you know that the wound has already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And this type of stitching with needles is most convenient for small wounds, as you can use one or two needles or around that many.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second type of stitching is common: it involves passing the needle through four points, two ends of the tissue and two corners of the suture, in one motion, with a needle that has thread properly wrapped around it in terms of fineness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	When you have pierced these four extremities with the needle, reduce the needle from that part which you began, so that the thread may be drawn up from the most prominent part of the wound, so that the suture may be like a seam on cloth where the pieces are tightly sewn together.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each stitch by the width of the smallest finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known to be suitable for humans.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And in such a suture, I stitched the wound of a man who was injured in his abdomen with a knife, and the disruption of the wound was greater than one palm, and it had penetrated around two palms from the edge of the intestines, and the disruption was in the middle of the organ; then I reduced that after the intestine had been out of the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound healed in the space of fifteen days or thereabouts, and he was treated and recovered; and afterward he spoke with words for some time, and returned to his usual state.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that he could not be healed; and by miracle of fire, for I did not treat him with any drug, since it was in a place where drugs were not available nor any medicine, but I placed over the wound two pieces of cloth soaked in honey twice a day and washed it frequently with water mixed with honey until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will describe two types of suture according to the description in the text.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin the suture from the outer part and pass the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so when the needle penetrates into the bone and in that place twist the thread according to straightness and length of the entire body, and leave the extremity of the suture in which you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate at the other extremity the needle from the inner part to the outer part at the other extremity of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that penetration, now make another penetration in that same extremity of the wound from the outer part to the inner part; and leave the extremity of the suture that is in this place, and make the needle penetrate at the other extremity from the inner part to the outer part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make your penetration such that when you penetrate it into the suture at the extremity of the wound, which is in the part inside so that all of this penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then start from this side and proceed to the other side at the extremity that is of the suture in the other place, and extract the needle from the bone into which it penetrates, and then reduce it back to that bone and attach the extremity of the suture that is on the other side to this extremity of the wound; and extract it from the bone that is on this side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this one side and then the other, and do this alternately until you sew up everything that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the essence of this method of suturing is that you sew with a suture thread as if sewing skins, in such a way that you sew the suture one time from the side of the bone extremity, and leave it open on another pass until it is complete.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Here is the translation:
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Place the needle at one end of the suture closest to you, and make it penetrate inside the wound in this way; then cut both ends of the suture. Then rotate the needle so that it penetrates from outside to inside at both ends of the suture.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then rotate each of them and make each penetrate from inside the wound to outside at both ends of another suture on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suturing is better than the common quick suture, and it is the type of suture about which I have previously mentioned.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Walia.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And if someone says that the suturing of the abdomen is done with two needles, it means you insert a thread into each needle and begin by passing one needle through from the side where you are, making it penetrate into the opposite side according to the method used for sewing equal pieces.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when the disruption is in the middle of the abdomen, then the suturing of it is more difficult than for other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the judgment in the treatment of wounds is the judgment for other wounds as well.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is that when you treat a recent wound with its own blood before the air alters it, and reduce the bleeding and clean it properly, then apply powder for healing.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply some ingredients that harden and seal the wound, and make it firm with sutures and bandages; then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If the medicines are not present, then wait for a short time, because it begins to sweat and becomes less severe, and change that twice a day as you have been taught, until it is healed, so that you do not need other medication in most conditions when the illnesses are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the illness will communicate to the principal limbs, then cover the wool with high-quality oil or scented oil, and place it around the areas between the joints, applying it there.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if pain or putrefaction occurs in the body cavities, since this often happens, then apply stiptic black tea powder to it, and especially if the putrefaction has reached the cavity and an abscess has formed penetrating into the surrounding tissue.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that what affects the large cavity is harder to heal than what affects the small cavities.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because the cavity called “gugun” does not readily recover from an illness that affects it completely; and this is due to the great number of veins within it, its large size, the subtlety of its structure, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what proceeds from the illness is pus, and you obtain that fresh, reduce it according to your judgment in the same way as you reduce the cavities.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed to the space and has already turned green or black, then when you apply medication over the area that is discolored, do so to promote the flow of blood, as pus affects both veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Here is the translation:
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Recollection of the problems that occur in the bowel.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the bowel and it is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, because I saw one who was afflicted in their belly by a lance wound, and the affliction was on the right side of the stomach, and the affliction was old and had become a fistula, with discharge and gas.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I proceeded with the treatment of it, even though I was not confident in its healing, but I sought to carefully treat that part until it was healed and the area was consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And after I saw the area already consolidated, I warned about the consequences that could arise from this unfortunate event in their belly; and no one suffered any harm due to this bad accident and remained in good health by eating and drinking properly, and soon they were active as usual.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced individuals say that when there is a small problem in the bowel, it should be treated as follows: take ants with large heads; then bring together the two edges of the wound and place one of those ants, which has an open mouth, on the two edges of the wound; thus, when the ant bites onto them and tightens its mouth, you cut off its head because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another ant next to the first one, and do not stop doing this with ants one after another according to the quantity of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that and close the wound; and let those heads remain attached in the bowel until the bowel is healed; and no harm will come to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	It is possible that the gut be tied with fine thread made from animal gut like it is done with a needle; and you take the end of this thin gut suture, and make it bare, and then tie the end of it to the suture material wrapped around it, and then introduce that thread into needles and attach it to that part of the gut, and reduce it at the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suture with ants is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and extensive, especially if it affects one of the fine gut sutures, then at that time only partial healing can occur, and not complete recovery from it.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that every wound and abscess when it becomes old and chronic, and forms an ulcer, and is not consolidated or healed over time without being excised, then, regardless of which part of the body it affects, it is universally called a fistula, and we refer to it as such an abscess.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And truly, a fistula is a felt-like nodulation, hard and white, at which there is no pain but to which there is itching as there is itching from the irritation of bird's lice; and for this reason it is called such an itchy rash, that is, irritation.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in some people moist, which flows continuously; and the moisture is easily excised within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And at times this moisture is thick, and it is little, and it is coarse, and it is fine.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	This has been said in the division when discussing wounds, that any ulcer which is not healing or is on uncircumcised flesh, is due to one of these causes: either because there is little natural healing power in the body; or because the wound itself is harmful; or because between the wound and the healthy tissue there is tough skin preventing new growth; or because it is from a foreign substance; or because that ulcer by nature contains pus and the matter sent to it is of poor quality; or because the medicine used for its treatment is inappropriate; or when corruption sets in the region, and it becomes pestilential; or due to the properties of the place, as in Saragossa, where illness is difficult to digest and healing of an abscess is delayed by nature; or because there is bone within it, or bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	Having shown all those causes, the signs of them, and their treatment with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is necessary for me to tell you about the treatment of fistulas, which is performed through an operation with my method.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; some of them reach large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the bladder, or intestines, or the kidney, or any of the ribs, or any of the vertebrae of the back, or any of the complex joints such as those of the hand and foot; and others are close to the main part of the limb and similar areas.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore, among these fistulas that follow this method, they are among the diseases difficult to heal, and do not receive a cure easily, and dealing with them requires effort and knowledge.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if any of the fistulas has a depth that does not reach the places mentioned above and you hope for and trust in its cure, and you wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula goes straight ahead, explore it with this.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	And if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of thin lead, for the lightness of its body causes it to float and bend around the tortuosity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is having horrible twists, it is not possible for you to signify upon it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then irrigate the openings through those openings, for the moisture with which you irrigate will go from that one to the other openings and flow out.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire carefully to know if there is bone or nerve here, and whether the depth of the fistula is distant or near, or if it is a fistula with many openings that exceeds your strength and your understanding, in which you investigate the malady, and the cause of the pain under your compression on the spot, and similar signs and accidental causes related to the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood on all those causes with true judgment, then proceed to the cure with confidence: and this is that you now consider whether it is a fistula apparent near or in a soft place, distant from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places I have told you about.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Now you dry the fistula as was said before in its narration, and remove what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what has grown out from the opening of the flesh or of similar tissue, and treat it until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of great depth and follows a straight course, it is necessary to incise that as far inward as you are able, and then remove all its corrupted flesh; afterwards apply bandages wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert these into the cavity of the fistula which you have probed with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this for several days until the sharp medicine has dissolved all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then treat it with applications that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it does not heal with this treatment, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you need to ascertain this, then you should probe it and dry it as we have recommended, unless you prohibit any reason involving a vein or nerve or main limb as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness on it, then you should excise that until all the corruption is removed; afterwards treat it with what will generate flesh until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it does not heal and pus continues to flow as before, then you will know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; then uncover it again and carefully examine its condition and clean it with the utmost diligence, and afterwards treat it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it heals, that is good; but if not, then you will know that the corruption is in the depths of the body, which you have not reached, and then in that case you should only treat the symptoms.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, it is up to you to remove that; then you pull it out with fine forceps, which are suitable for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any behind for any reason due to your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if any cause of humidity opposes you, and in their incision there is neither fear nor error, then incise those ligaments or muscles as necessary, and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if it is not possible for you to remove the bones at this time, then apply to the wound what will alleviate the inflammation, and leave it as it is until such time as the area around those bones has become flesh and ligaments, and guard against the wound consolidating, and ensure that the section you have incised does not contract during your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having said that, if you fear to proceed, apply a poultice submerged in hot oil with thyme, or a poultice submerged in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments, for when these will heal those ligaments, and the bones are separated from them, and those attractions are alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone such as the bone of a camel or ox or similar, and what is corrupted of it is only its surface, then scrape off that corruption with resistance only behind until that blackness and corruption are removed, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if what is corrupted of it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area and thoroughly incise within the location where the corruption has spread, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	Here is what is recommended for you concerning what to do when attending to a patient so that you may follow this example and have assistance regarding your procedure.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man around xxx years old came with pain in his body, and concerning the internal parts where the matter inside the body has been conveyed to the abdomen, it is a large abscess, and there is not an external cause for this.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then time was wasted due to the doctors' mistake until the abscess became gangrenous, and pus began to accumulate from the matter, and his treatment was delayed until an opening had to be made in the abdomen, and they created openings through which all of the pus and moisture of the body were discharged.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then many doctors attended to him for two years, and none of them had skill in the art until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw his abdomen and the matter that was flowing from those openings in large quantities; and already his body was completely emaciated and the color of his skin was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted a probe into one of those openings and the probe reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I examined the openings quickly and found that they reached all parts of the abdomen.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I decided to incise one of the openings so that I could expose part of the bone, and found it corrupted; it was already turned to earth and decayed and blackened; and part of the abdomen had also penetrated into the mesentery.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I used what had been shown to me and prepared from the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I cut out only the corruption that was in the bone and prepared it, which I had already reduced.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I paused the healing of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, but it did not consolidate.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I reopened and exposed the bone again over the initial exposure, and found continued corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I prepared what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I was forced to perform the cure of it and its healing, but it did not heal.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I exposed it on another occasion and did not cease to excise the bone little by little particularly and forced its healing, and it did not heal until I excised around one palm of it, and that part with its marrow, and then healed that with medicines, and it gradually consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to repeat the operation and cutting of it except for the disposition of its fever and for its lack of tolerance and fear of death, because it was affected at all hours by excessive evacuation due to syncope malum.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus he was healed completely, and nothing remained in place of the hard flesh; and his condition improved in his body, and his strength returned; and he resumed his usual disposition and did not act contrary to it in walking or harm from any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if it is a prominent bone in place of an already injured body, then you should proceed as follows: take a thread and tie it at the end of that prominent bone, and order someone to extend that; pause with a thicker thread after the first one; then bind it over the skin near the bone, and stretch the extremity so that you pull the skin away from the sides, and thus you expose the skin above where you want to cut so that the knife does not injure the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	Place a board or table under the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to saw through the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	You should saw through the corrupted area little by little, for if it is in the concavity of the bone where corruption and not appearance indicates it, you must saw from the other side.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted but not prominent, and one part continues to the other, with the corruption in the middle or part of it, then you expose the flesh from all sides entirely; and afterwards place a board underneath, and then saw off the first part where the corruption is, until the sawing of the other part is continuous.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the sawing be according to the location of the corruption a little bit, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw through the bone where it continues from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in proportion but is generated elsewhere.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you, and then excise that part, and clean that area according to each possible disposition, and when there is no generation left to be corrected by you, do not harm veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know which incisors and saws to use for cutting these bones are very much dependent on the situation of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, their fineness and size, their hardness and rarity; therefore, you must prepare appropriate instruments for every kind of operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that this operation signifies to you according to the kind of instrument of which you need; when you are great in study and long and knowledgeable about the methods of this art, and witness to ways of diseases, then you have yourself what is suitable for those instruments for every disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I tell you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will place as simple among those which you will process to your prohibition, which you will experiment on others.
Forma de serra:	Form of a saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of a rasp:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this rasp be in the form of the head of a star-shaped key, and its points be in the form of the points of a sharp tool.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not suitable unless those heads of the joints are rubbed when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is large and wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of a larger razor than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a wide razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another well-made saw: let it be made with the sharpest curve and the sharpness of iron, and the handle of wood well made.
Forma de lu:	Shape of the loincloth:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	 Shape of razors with a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	 Shape of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	 Shape of another curved-edged razor:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	 Shape of small razors resembling a tenta:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	 Shape of incisors with which bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	 Shape of another smaller incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	 Shape of another incisor; this resembles a reed, and its tip is like a saw, and it is displayed in various places according to the size of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	 Shape of a reed that is appropriate for the size of the bones to be drilled:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	 And its tip is triangular and sharp.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	 And it is made of Indian steel, and similarly it is appropriate for all the purposes we have mentioned regarding razors, incisors, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	For cutting the ends and锯骨的切割。根据之前的句子，更自然的翻译应该是：
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities can become diseased either through an intrinsic or extrinsic cause. If you treat the corruption with medicine and do not see improvement, sometimes the corruption will extend to the limb without any apparent reason. At that point, it is necessary to amputate the part of the limb where the corruption occurs so that the patient may avoid death or greater harm which would be a worse outcome for the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that which affects the person is that the limb becomes blackened, as if it were burned by fire. Or you will see the blackness spreading where the corruption has entered and threatens to take over the entire body; therefore, you must consider amputation of that part.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, the cause of the corruption may be the sting or bite of certain venomous creatures such as a scorpion, viper, or rattlesnake and the like.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or sting is in the extremity of a finger, then you must amputate the finger so that the corruption does not spread to the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if the corruption affects the hand, you must amputate at the wrist so that the corruption does not spread to the forearm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if necessary, you must amputate the arm at the elbow joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption spreads further and reaches around the elbow, then the patient's death is likely. And to treat such cases, the appropriate measure of effectiveness varies.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, if the corruption reaches the toe, you must amputate it at one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if you take off the skin of the foot, then you cut away the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	And if you enter into the bone, then you cut along the cavity into the joint of the bone.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already reached the bone, then there is no remedy but dismissal, and to leave the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of cutting off a limb or tying it up is that you tie a ligature below the part where you wish to cut, and tie another ligature above the location; and extend one ligature to the lower parts, and extend another ligature upwards; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligatures by about a span so that all the flesh is exposed; and then it is either cut off or tied up.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it is necessary to cover the patient with a cloth on all sides so that it does not touch the affected area, and to ensure that the patient receives appropriate care and that abscesses are treated.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	And if blood flow occurs when you are working, then you should immediately cauterize the area, or apply some powders to stop the bleeding; and then return to your treatment once it is under control.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the wounded limb with a ligature at a convenient place, and treat it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I warn you about what befell a man in his foot, this accidental condition that I and you have recommended against, which turned black in his foot as if it were burned by fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	From that corruption arising first in its proper place inside, it tends to affect all the body.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man treats himself with poultices more than once before the healing goes to the limb despite the vehemence of what he endures in pain and heat, and by incising that part inside at the joint, the fire is healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time ago, that corruption occurred in the finger of the hand indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it comes to me, and so I perforate to remove that excess through what I apply to the hand with medicines, near the purification of the body; and the excess is not reflected back but begins to move from one finger to another starting within the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asks me to incise his hand, but I do not want to do that, hoping for the removal of that excess through repercussion, and more so because I fear that the incision of his hand might lead to death, as the power of the illness was very strong.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And after he departed from me, he returned to his homeland, and later I learned that the man treated himself and incised his entire hand, and he was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have added this narration only so that it may assist in understanding the nature of this illness and to serve as an indication for how such cases should be treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Regarding the treatment of sinus conditions and the quality of enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess extends inside to form a collection of pus, and then it is broken and perforated, and the pus is discharged from there, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin that covers it remains thin like cloth, and it has not progressed to corruption nor affected the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged within so that corruption presses upon some member, it is then called a fistula and not a carbuncle.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for it is to incise that swelling completely as it revolves, and especially when it becomes fine like cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	However, if you expect that the swelling will adhere and that such corruption has not yet reached the deepest part, and there is pus in the swelling, then your treatment should be to use an enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you should consider the sinus, and if it is large and the arm with which you are treating has a foul odor, then use an enema with Egyptian medicine made of oil, vinegar, and honey in equal parts, mixed together in a vessel until the mixture becomes thick like molasses.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take what is necessary and dissolve the medicine in water and honey; use this enema for the sinus, and secure the opening of it, leaving the medication inside for the duration of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that medicine carefully; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the odor is removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And at times an enema of ash water is used when you do not have this medicine available; take the ashes of wheat, put them in water; then strain it and use that water for the enema until you are confident that the sinus is cleansed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then use an enema of honey and water mixed in equal parts, and also use an enema of vinegar and honey mixed together, because honey has cleansing properties and vinegar helps to adhere the sinus, especially when the vinegar has a strong astringent and drying effect.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you see that some wounds are swollen and you confirm that the sinus is already drained, then irrigate them with water that promotes flesh growth.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take a decoction of white myrtle and dissolve it with rose oil and vinegar; or you can irrigate it with various medicines and other decoctions that have the properties already described in the chapter on decoctions.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and does not allow the cannula for irrigation to pass through, then gradually widen it with a small instrument, and pause in the dilation while wrapped in an Egyptian decoction or basilicon decoction until it is sufficiently widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly, if the opening is too wide, then you should bring together the edges with stitches and leave it in a condition suitable for irrigation to be added.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening from which the fluid flows is raised to the upper parts, then dry it in a lower position where the fluid can flow downward, for when the arm is constricted at the depth of the sinus, flesh will be formed there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus in a lower position relative to the bone as you wish, then proceed to prepare the member with a method by which the fluid flows easily according to your circumstances and without any obstruction hindering the flow.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that should be applied to the sinus as needed, and extend them over a cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such quantity as to cover the entire extent of the sinus; then, with scissors, make an incision slightly wider than the opening of the sinus along its edge. Next, extend another piece of cloth soaked in strong decoctions over this incision according to its size, and place it far from the opening of the sinus so that the fluid can drain without obstructing the large cloth until a few days later when you may remove it once.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	Move the one who is above the opening of the sinus, which you should drain at all times so that what is inside the arm exits.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know whether what comes from inside the arm is thin or thick, or is digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And with this, you should consider the location of that sinus, whether in there the patient feels pain or not, and if it is in an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter that is discharged over the opening of the sinus has adhered or tends to adhere, then you must loosen it or do so every third day. When you loosen the crust, then change the dressing for a new one and renew the application.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if within the sinus there is space for subtle pus to accumulate, then do not despair of its adherence, for healing will naturally occur, as some people experience delayed regeneration of flesh in their wounds, while others see the opposite happen.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if for several days the arm remains undigested and pus is not discharged from the sinus, then you know that the sinus does not adhere. And if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and becomes prolonged, then adjust to a drying effect in your medications. If the medicines are moist in their substance and in their efficacy, they should be dried as well when there is an excess of moisture present.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the most important thing in curing is to use a well-defined dressing and dissolve it in rose oil. Apply it over the wound as you would with an earlier dressing of its substance, and proceed accordingly.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	In that action, when there is no bandage, find a dressing, honey which you have cooked so that it thickens, and use it; or take myrrh and aloes and sprinkle them, and grind over the honey which is on the fire, and immediately apply this to cloth and strengthen that upon the joint; and apply this with the honey which you have cooked so that it thickens, and sprinkle over cloth and strengthen that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes it is administered with the root of aristolochia longa and seeds of lily (and lily celestial) and flour of oats and centaury, and use those simples or adjust them, sprinkle these and sift and powder over the honey which I have recommended; and use this.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the joint is prolonged and has not been healed by this treatment, then you will know that the corruption is in its bone, and it affects the bones or other hard members or the ligaments; now treat it with a fistulous cure, as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	On the treatment of paronychia and cracked nails, and the incision of an additional finger and sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Paronychia is an abscess that arises beside the nail of a finger on the hand or foot, and it can also occur in other fingers. When it becomes prolonged, its treatment is more difficult; it may be an abscess from cautery, or it may become corrupted, and it discharges pus which corrodes the root of the nail, and very quickly corrupts all of it, and often spreads its corruption to the bone causing a foul odor, and the extremity of the finger becomes deformed, and its color turns blackish.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have that as we have said in the division and your treatment does not confine itself to it, then it is necessary that you incise with a knife all the superfluous tissue that is decayed from the nail and immediately cauterize the wound in that area, for cauterization is beneficial in such cases.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is sound and the tendon is healthy, and the divisions of the tendon are already closed by the flesh around them, and they begin to press upon it with pain and distress, then you should pause and cut a thin incision along the angle of the tendon where it presses on the flesh, and push that tendon up, and dissect that flesh easily, and wait over what remains of the flesh with corrosive medicines until it is completely removed; and afterwards cure that wound until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already begun in the bone, then you should dissect that bone and extract it, for it is never healed when the bone is corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you find the corrosion and corruption spreading to the finger, then you should dissect it at one of its joints according to where the pain is felt, and afterwards cure it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If the tendon is affected by contusion or inflammation, and there is severe pain in that area, then at the beginning you should perform venesection on the patient, and afterwards dry the tendon with a sharp spatula in a transverse cut from above to below, and be careful that the incision does not reach into the flesh behind the tendon, for this would cause intense pain to the patient, and it would result in excessive scar tissue forming in the area; and afterwards treat that place with something that alleviates pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But in the case of a swollen finger, which occurs in many people, it is often very fleshy, and there is little flesh on the bones, or it is often in the tendon.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them originate at the root of the joint, or the swelling is in some of the joints of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	He who is born with weak joints in his fingers will not suffer much, and he who is born with strong joints in them suffers little.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those who are born with fleshy parts, the section is easier, and you should cauterize that which you have dissected with a hot spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But for he who is born with the joint in a delicate state, the cure is difficult; and therefore be careful not to cut it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But in he who is born with loose fingers, it is necessary that you cauterize the flesh at the beginning with a round cautery down to the bone, and then use one of those saws suitable for this purpose, and afterwards treat what is inside until it heals.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But for consolidation that occurs between the bones either by repeated strain or by the nature of the person born with it, or by consolidation of a wound or by burning from fire, or similarly, then you should section that consolidation until the said parts return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between the layers of the wound in rose oil so that they do not consolidate too quickly, and separate them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until it is properly consolidated.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs in any of them on the palm, you should then section that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suits the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of cautery for veins, these are the varieties.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins are those that are thick and full of melancholic humors, which move through the limbs of the body, and their greatest occurrence is in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then it happens that you administer purge for the black cholera several times with strong expulsion, and shortly afterward let blood from the patient's basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The cure for them with iron is according to two methods: one is that it be incised and the black blood be drawn out, and the other method is that the vein be raised and all of it be extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of the wound is according to this method: embrocate at the beginning with hot water mixed in such a way that the thick blood becomes resolved, which is like sediment in the poultice, and then tightly bind the poultice on the most prominent part of the wound below the navel with a bandage, and then cauterize the vein in one place, or two, or three with wide incisions, and then draw out the black blood with your hand below the poultice upwards and downwards until the quantity of blood is removed as you wish and as much as suffices, and which the patient's strength can endure.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then bandage it, and command him to abstain from foods that generate black cholera.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And iterate the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and inform the patient about this.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But the elevation of them is according to this method: you shave the poultice area of the patient if there are any hairs on it, and then put him in a bath and embrocate the poultice with hot water until it reddens and the veins become prominent; or exercise him vigorously with exercise if a bath is not available, until the limb becomes warm.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	For the operation to expose the windpipe, cut along the side of the vein by incision either in front or behind it, or lower down you should cut at the angle.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	To operate on the windpipe with hooks and scrape the vein from all parts until it appears to the touch, and you should observe its appearance as it turns black in that place.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And so when you open it, you will see the white part which is the membrane.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Then you should insert the thread where it is raised and displaced from the windpipe, and suspend it with hooks.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then make another incision near that incision by three fingers, and then scrape the windpipe above the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then lift that and incise it in the rear section where the angle is, and then extract it and lift it until it comes out through the second incision, and then extract it from the incision above that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	Then do this until you extract it from the incision that is highest or most distant from all the incisions, until everything comes out; and now you can close the incisions.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you cannot manage to extract and lift it, now insert a strong double-threaded needle and tie it and extract it, or insert the thread below and rotate your hand in all directions until it is expelled.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Be careful not to cut it; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to lift that piece, and the patient will suffer harm from that injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all that is done, then pause upon the place of the wound a cloth submerged in wine and rose oil and non-rose oil, and care for it until it be healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vessel is contracted with twists to which there is a covering in the parts, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut along each twist of it and at the places where it is covered, and immediately suspend it with hooks until you elevate it entirely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful in your section that you do not incise the vein and that you do not injure it, for it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and use your prudence in this.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Shape of the incision with which the vessel is severed:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of curved hooks:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not made sharp like the hooks nor with a pointed end so that it does not injure the vein; and it should be of thick flexibility, like lion's sinew, for if it were slender, it would cut the vein because of its slenderness; however, it should be in excess of thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of the extraction of the leg vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is found in camels in warm lands such as in Al-Ategi in the land of Arabs and in the warm, dry lands of India where no grass or vegetation grows.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And similarly, it is found in other parts of the body apart from the camel.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its generation is from putrefaction beneath the skin, just as worms and vermin come forth within the bodies of serpents, scorpions, and other creatures generated between the skin and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	Here is the translation:
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	Then when it appears at the opening, you should wrap around that a piece of lead weighing one dram, and about two drams in length, and attach that and let the lead hang from the wound.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as you apply it to the parts externally, wrap that in lead and attach it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is elongated, then you should incise a part of it and wrap the remaining part; and do not incise that until it has come out externally, for if you incise that which is contracted it will go into the flesh and cause an abscess, corruption, and a bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Therefore, it must be treated gently and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the body and there remains no cause for concern in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And in some people, this vein extends to about five palms in length, and I have heard that it has reached up to twenty palms in length.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised at the time of its treatment, then insert the probe into the tract and perforate that along the tract through the body until all that is in the material is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the area with medicines for several days; and subsequently treat that as you would an abscess.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and it comes out through multiple openings, with each branch coming out from a separate opening.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And thus treat that as we have said in the division and according to what has been mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of cutting above worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is called in some lands bovine disease because often it happens among cows and it is a worm of which one is born between the skin and the flesh, and moves throughout the body up and down, and is shown through sensation because of its movement from limb to limb until it breaks the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is from the putrefaction of some humors, just as happens with worms and serpents and earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared because of its malice, for when it moves in the body and rises to the head, and reaches the brain, then suddenly it lightens within and enters and destroys the brain, which often happens.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you want to cure that and extract it, then it is not done except according to the movement and appearance of it to sensation. Then tie what is above it and what is below it tightly with bandages and constriction, and afterwards dry over it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it penetrates into the flesh and you do not find it, then you should apply cauterization with fire over the area where it is. The main cause that is feared is corruption of it by which it corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you see it reaching the head near the brain, then tie above the eyebrow with strong constriction, and afterwards dry over it, and extract that; and it is necessary for the patient to use purification of their body with medicines evacuating bad putrid humors, and guard against foods generating putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On incision for inflammation of the uvula.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called in our land nafir, and it is pain that comes to certain members of the body, and it changes from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And now I will describe it as I am about to recount to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to attend to a sick woman in a village, and when I uncovered her arm, I saw a small inflammation in the funis vein of the arm. And after it had been ruptured for about an hour, I saw that this inflammation moved just as quick as wax would rise, but more quickly than one might expect, like living silver flowing from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain moved from that location and settled in the muscle, and it stayed there for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it moved to the other side of the body until it reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then she told me that it was revolving throughout her body as I had observed, and I was greatly amazed by its change and the speed with which it moved from one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had seen this before in my own patients in that manner, but I have never witnessed such pain being transferred from one member to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see this in my patients as I did in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think it could be this way except that the woman was of weak constitution, with delicate limbs and exposed veins, in which this wind-like sensation appeared to change.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that there does not appear according to this rear curvature in those who are delicate and of thin human veins weakened.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want the treatment for it, and the patient feels that pain, at that moment it does not appear to be as we have said, at that moment you strengthen over that area and lift it gently so that the trapped air is expelled, and cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then treat that by evacuating the body and expelling air, and apply remedies to remove foul pills and pills of saffron and similar substances.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are varied according to their types and the parts of the body where they strike, for their diversity is such that some have large tips, others small, some concave, others blunt; and among them there are solid ones; those with three angles, and those with tongues; and those which are like spears.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and the parts in which they strike is according to two methods: for the members or principal members such as concavities, such as the brain, heart, and spine, lungs, ribs, bowels, bladder, and similar parts; therefore, when you hit one of these members and it appears to you as signs of death, which cause I will recount shortly, then it is necessary that you avoid extracting that arrow from those in whom death approaches quickly due to the major dispositions. And when no such bad signs appear to you and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then you extract that one and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the signs of the head are when it falls upon the arrow, and passes through the bone, and exits from the brain which is above the head, for it happens by the soda vehement, and scotoma, and vertigo, and rigor in the eyes, and inflammation and rigor of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding and vomiting of bile, and easily cut off is speech, and destroyed is voice, and exits from the place of the plague moisture white like dust, and there are of it wetness to the appearance as of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the signs of the arrow when it falls into the heart, so that it is near the left breast, and feels there where it is fixed in hard tissue, not soft; and easily the movement of the arrow is like the movement of the pulse, and draws black thick blood from the wound, and dries that coldness of the extremities, and cold sweat; therefore you know that death approaches soon.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung, spewing frothy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are swollen, and the color of the patient changes, and he exhales great breath, and demands a craving for cold air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow falls on the membrane which is in the thighs, and the pain then is near the small ribs, and it causes great and violent pain and sighing, and there is no strength at all in all the members of the muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow falls on the stomach, then very quickly there will be from the wound undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow is in the belly, and it is fixed within it, make some incision in the wound, or the tissue, or the intestine which is disrupted, and there is no hope for the cure of the arrow's removal.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow strikes in the bladder, and it comes out with urine, and processes for some reason to the parts outside, and suddenly there is pain over the injury, then you know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But the other members as well, such as in the face, the neck, and the jaw, and the shoulders and the helpers, and the vertebrae of the back, and the collarbone, and the ribs and similar parts of the limbs, are saved according to the best dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recount this to you as I have seen regarding the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand through this about your own treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that in a person who was struck by an arrow in the lacrimal bone near the root of the nose, I removed it from the other side, left the gray matter of the ear alone, and he healed without damage to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I removed another arrow from a Jew who was struck in the gray matter of his eye. After leaving the eyelid intact, the arrow was already hidden and only a small part of it could be grasped to which its shaft adhered. It was a large sharp arrow of the Turks, made of iron like a lion's tooth, which had no barbs.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew healed, and no harm came to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	About removing an arrow from a Christian man who had been shot in the groin, and it was an Arabian arrow, which has barbs; then I made an incision between two grooves, and it was already submerged under his skin there; then I carefully extracted that, and the Christian man recovered.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I removed another arrow from a man who had been shot in his abdomen, and he was thought to die because of it; and so, after thirty days had passed and there were no changes regarding his condition, I made an incision on the arrow and extracted it, and he recovered, and did not suffer any further complications.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow had penetrated between his two thighs, and the wound had become consolidated on him, and after seven years, the arrow was exposed at the root of the thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had penetrated her abdomen, and the wound had consolidated within her, and there were no changes regarding her condition, and the woman did not suffer any harm in performing any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow had penetrated his face, and the wound had consolidated, and he broke the arrow without feeling any pain, and many similar cases are like this.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I removed the arrow from the prince of the king who had been shot in the middle of his nose, and it had already shifted slightly to the right, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for his treatment regarding the embedding of the arrow within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then I examined the wound of the finger with a narrow probe; then I probed it carefully but did not feel anything there; however, she felt pain below her right ear, and then I hoped that that point was at the end of the finger.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied a plaster to the place with an emplastrature in which there is a virtue attractive and digestive, confident that the place would reveal itself to me so that I could see the location of the finger, because it would adhere to that.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And no significant accident occurred at the site where the finger had come to rest; and I continued with the plaster on it for several days without any incident; and as the wound healed, after some days I felt the finger move within its socket and reported this to myself.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Then I applied acute corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it became hot, and with a probe I probed that area, and found the end of the finger delicately adhering to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I adjusted the appearance of the wound with that acute medicine until the end of the finger became visible to me, and it took me four months to reach this stage.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And when the wound had become sufficiently enlarged, and it was possible for me to introduce forceps into it, I did so but without success. Then I ceased to attempt further manipulations by other means, until one day I began to use methods of extraction with forceps carefully made, as will be shown in the form at the end of this chapter, from which I extracted it; and then I restored the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some surgeons judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and I have restored it and the wound has been consolidated, and the patient has been healed entirely, and there was nothing else to be done for him.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you may apply this rule and explanation to what I have not mentioned, for the parts of this art and the definitions thereof are not understood in narrative alone nor do they comprehend those who read the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise craftsmen compare with few words; and in what is present about what is absent; and when accidents occur, they should discover new operations and new instruments for the descent of strange causes from the art.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not extracted from the members in which they are lodged except in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they intersect; or by the opposite of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is extracted by the place where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding in soft tissue, and is drawn out and removed.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey this advice about the time when you catch it, then wait some days before removing it so that the flesh around it may heal and become accustomed to its presence and its removal.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is lodged in bone and you do not follow this advice, then leave it for several days and gradually move it according to its attraction and motion each day, and then it can be safely removed.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not follow this advice for several days, then it is necessary that you perforate around the arrow in that bone from all sides with a fine drill until the space around the arrow is enlarged, and then remove it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is embedded in the bone of the head and has penetrated into one of the ventricles of the brain, and any of those symptoms which I have mentioned appear in the patient, then at this time refrain from extracting the arrow and leave it inside until its natural course takes place over a few days; for if it reaches the heart, death is not thereby prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not embedded except in the bone itself and does not penetrate into the heart, and the patient remains stable for several days without any of those symptoms occurring, then you should devise a way to extract the arrow and do so.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is embedded and you do not proceed with extraction, then you should administer treatments around the arrow as we have recommended, and take care of the area until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is hidden in the body's location and is out of reach, then you should probe around there, and if you feel it, then grasp it with some instruments that are suitable for extracting it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the shaft, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein here, then enlarge the wound until it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is attached to the ears along with them, then you should remove the flesh in which it is embedded completely with all the skill that you can; and proceed with this, if you cannot do so by avoiding cutting through the flesh in fracturing the ears and twisting them until you are able to.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you perform the extraction of the arrow in whatever place it may be, then you use both a twist of your hand and forceps to all parts so that it obeys; and carefully with great care that the arrow is not broken and that it is made difficult for you and for its extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do this at that time, then leave it for several days until the parts around it become firm, and then try again when it is easier.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if there is contrary bleeding, then you administer what we have said about treatment in the respective chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your virtue from cutting into veins or nerves, or tendons, and administer care in every possible way to avoid the arrow; and do this with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness as I advise and recommend.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, make the arrow straight so that the patient is in accordance with the figure according to which you should determine the extraction of the arrow from it, for this is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But arrows that are driven in from the opposite side, or that you have already processed some part of them to the outer parts, or if the extremity of the arrow causes swelling due to pressure from the bone above and raises it; then you should cut into that area. Make the incision according to the amount by which the forceps grasp it; and then pull it out, for it will be easy to do so in this manner.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If a bone is held in the wound, then place it straight according to its opposite part until the arrow presses into the bone, and enlarge it thus, and then extract that one.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for several days, and then try to extract it when there is less inflammation.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is there, then push it out from there.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft has fallen in and you want to administer impulse, then insert and use it, if it is blunt, a hollow instrument so that it enters the cavity of it into the base of the arrow and then push it out from there.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the arrow is convex, then push it out with a strong instrument entering into it, for the arrow is lightened by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then ensure that you hollow out all the flesh in which it is embedded, if it is possible for you to do so, and then treat it with what is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow hits the feet, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and is close so that you touch it with your finger, and it is possible for you to cut above it, then cut above it and guard against cutting into a vein or nerve, and extract it, and then treat the wound as needed, and cure it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps with which arrows are pulled:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the extremities of these be shaped like the beak of a bird, which are made like pincers so that they do not let go of the arrow.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	Of those, various types are made large, few and medium-sized, according to the quantity of the arrow's size and the smallness of the sinew, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The impelling concavity of this extremity is curved like an owl's feather so that the instrument of the arrow may be glided into it, and the impulse of that blunt part:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of the impelling blunt extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	like an arrow so that the instrument may be glided into its concave arrow and is propelled by that.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	About the incision of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for phlebotomy of which the custom is to perform phlebotomy at xxx, of which in the head sixteen, two pulsating veins which are near the ears, called alhasisain; two herbs that appear on both temples; and two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the eyes which are called aspicientz; and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the tip of the nose; and two glands that are on the neck; and two veins that are on the upper lip; and two veins that are on the lower lip; and these are the veins that are called algelic; and there are two veins below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are five; among those is one cephalic, and it runs along the wild chestnut tree; and the people call it "the vein of the head," blunt, and it is a medium-sized vein, and it consists of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and they name that by the people "vein of the whole body," and basilica is the vein which lies on the domestic chestnut tree, and is called "citillar," and they call that one the vulgar "vein of the abdomen"; and the funis of the arm, and it lies over the elbow, and it is in this where phlebotomy is performed, and it appears above the wrist by manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein which is between the thumb and the little finger, and it runs on both sides.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And on the thigh and in the groin there are three veins; one of them is behind the curve of the tailbone of the wild animal; and the second is sophena, and its place is behind the groin of the domestic animal; and the vena sciatica, and its place is behind the groin of the wild animal; and in the groin there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The treatment of the veins that are near the ears is for catarrhs, antitics, hemorrhages, and old ulcers of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of treating those veins is as I recommend to you: shave the patient's head, and rub the patient’s head in the occipital area where both veins are with a large piece of cloth for good friction; then tighten the patient's hair with a bandage so that the two veins become visible near the ears at two lower points on the head; and press them with your thumb, and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your finger here, this is how you should proceed.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the scalpel, and it should be sharp, and then insert it behind the vein into the bone until the blood flow reaches the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then raise your hand with the vein and the bone towards the upper parts and incise the vein with a sharp incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers or around that amount; and let out as much blood as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then apply pressure with poultices and leave it until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And there is mentioned at the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cautery.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But of the two arteries, for the Templars the benefit of phlebotomy is to remove an ancient and persistent evil and frequent ophthalmia and acute effusions in the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those veins is as I recommend to you: have the patient sit and put your hand under their arm so that the two veins appear clearly by sight, and feel the pulse below with your fingers; then at this time attempt it.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then raise the tourniquet above the vein towards your hand with your finger, and insert the phlebotomy instrument below, and raise the vein up; and incise it as you have done with the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then loosen the patient's restraint, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, and afterwards apply a bandage and powder over it with strong compression, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And there is mentioned the description of them, and the incision of those veins, and the attraction at the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus the benefit of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is similar to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient diseases of the face and headache, stiffness, and foul-smelling ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of phlebotomy on it is as I recommend to you: the patient should hold their arm with a bandage so that the vein appears; then take the instrument called a fleam, which has this form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the punctures at the point which is at the head of the furrow above that vein and strike it from either side or for some other reason in that manner, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; and then remove the perforation of the patient and bind up that area until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And in some cases, a femoral vein incision is made, but it does not need to be of sharp extremity like the other vein incisions; rather, it should be blunt-ended, and make that incision transversely, because the bone is close by and strong, and the incision might easily break through if it were too fine.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	May the treatment of the two veins that are near the tear ducts of both eyes be used for eye itchiness due to irritation and grease in the eyes, as well as for illnesses of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the venesection is that the patient should hold their arm with a bandage, and then perform those incisions, while you stand above the head of the patient.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the venesection should be made transversely along a bit above or below the vein, where there is little flesh; and if the incision is fine, the tip of it might easily break through.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and pause when it reaches that point, and bind those areas for one night, and then remove them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	And the venesection of the vein of the nose is suitable for acute fever and violent headache, and for illnesses of the face and migraine and pain that occurs in the face, especially when they are chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	Of the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient strains his neck and brings it near to his nose with your left hand, and take the lancet sharp long and put it in the middle place of the nose tip according to straightness, for the vein does not appear to the sense here, and for the blood begins to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Move your hand with the small lancet little by little and make the blood flow according to your need; and then leave it for one night, for it is quickly restored.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The harm of phlebotomy on the two veins leads to constriction of them and to the beginning of leprosy and to many diseases and impetigo and bad corrosive ulcers as well as herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The quality of the phlebotomy of those is that the patient strains each one with his neck; and the surgeon stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then phlebotomize the vein with a long lancet and a broad small one little by little; and then extract blood according to season, quantity, or according to what you find necessary for that; and then do the same for the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then loosen the ligature and compress the two veins gently with a moderate constriction so that the patient is not overly constricted, and let it be done in the morning as the plague is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the harm of phlebotomy of the large veins applies to small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and cracks, and to bad ulcers that are inside the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	Of the quality of phlebotomy is that you make the patient sit before you, and tie a bandage around his neck, and then roll back his lips and look at two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the darkness of each of them, and this more so because in the vicinity of those veins there are small black ones; and then you cut each with a cutting incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If doubt is present in you and you do not know which one it is, then you should make an incision in the larger of them, and in the more apparent of them.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the appearance of the two veins that are on the upper lip.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	However, it is customary to cut more often the two veins that are on the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But of the two veins that are below, the tongue is often near the phlebotomy of the cephalic artery for precautions that are in the throat, to the illness of the uvula, and to illnesses of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those veins is that you place the patient between your hands in front of the light, and lift up his tongue, and look below the tongue, on one side of the vein and on the other side a vein, and the color of each tends towards blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then phlebotomize each one; and be careful not to penetrate too deeply when phlebotomizing them, for below those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are phlebotomized in the bend usually occur in all men, and the phlebotomy of theirs is done according to two methods, either place on the phlebotomy site a small round object like a blueberry or olive with subtlety; or use a scalpel for phlebotomy, and test if it hurts, and this is the form of it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this is what is suitable for sectioning and of those very thin and subtle ones according to the width of the veins and according to the constriction of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Method of millet-sized venesection:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Let the incisions be made as described, and it is suitable to open the concave full veins with obvious thick stems, and those that contain thick coagulated blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the method of olive-sized venesection:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this venesection is of lesser width and more subtle extremity, and it is suitable for venesection of thin veins that contain fine, thin blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	But the benefit of the venesection of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: for it extracts blood from diseases below the jaw and the neck, and from what affects the legs and the abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is suitable for the phlebotomist, when performing venesection on that vein, to be very careful with it and have great fear of it, because near it there is an artery. If he errs in the puncture of the venesection, he will cut that artery and cause a gushing of blood. Therefore, one should not perform venesection on that vein with a sharp instrument but rather with a cutting blade like a knife.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica vein does not appear by obvious means, then you should leave that one and switch to another, or seek some branch of it. Or perform venesection at the end of the arm where it is apparent; and section that vein with a knife for venesection as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you want to perform phlebotomy on the arm, then place your hand above the constriction of the arm until you know the location of the pulse, and then slightly further; and then hold the arm steady and incise the vein with a concave cut as we have said; and be careful not to strike the artery in any part of its location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see it, as you tighten the ligature, inflation occurs in the place that you marked slightly further, then that inflation is arterial swelling, and therefore avoid that area.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flow from the phlebotomy as it does in a child's urine, and the blood is fine and red, then you know that it is arterial blood; and then you continue and pause your hand on that for some time; and then remove your hand, and if the bleeding has stopped after several moments, then tighten the arm and leave that area.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And protect the patient from the misuse of it, and be overly cautious with it and do not use that area for several days until it is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	And if the bleeding does not stop, and you do not have medical assistance available, then you should incise the artery if it appears to you; because the extremity of it is contracted, and the blood has stopped; or take a piece of cloth, and fold that, and place one half tightly over the vein with a ligature and with powders on the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the bleeding has stopped, that is good; and if not, then treat that with what is prescribed for stopping the flow of blood from the veins.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The removal of the bone in many cases is difficult due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of bandaging the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But for the dark vein, phlebotomy is a method that extracts blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; by this means, which is composed of branches of the basilica and branches of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And it is important for the phlebotomist to be overly cautious during the phlebotomy of this area because below that lies a nerve; and then if there is an error in the puncture of the phlebotomy and the nerve is hit, it will cause numbness, and healing from this is difficult, and rarely is one fully healed. And this nerve appears to many as feeling; and since it is hidden from some people and is subtle and not shown, now you must pause your phlebotomy at which point you are performing phlebotomy in the section of the elbow, and avoid hitting the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should puncture the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The purpose of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is to extract blood from the head and provide relief for eye diseases.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And it is appropriate here, if you want to phlebotomize using the olive vein or the myrtle vein; for it is the safest of all veins, as it is not near any artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	But it is important for you to ensure that during phlebotomy, you do not puncture only the head of the lizard vein, and instead seek a location farther away, and avoid noting it unless it is hit accidentally a few times during initial punctures.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, sometimes a tumor is found in some people, when it is not affected by bloodletting at the first attempt, and we do not notice that tumor.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	However, the quality of that bloodletting and its consequences, in which one must think about their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is about which you should know that bloodletting is administered only to preserve health and with the hope of prevention and caution against the onset of diseases. Bloodletting should be performed on one of the veins located in the neck, namely: cephalic, fossa, and basilica. Bloodletting should be done at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter near mealtime, when signs of fullness appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And bloodletting should be performed on the third day or at the latest by the first hour of the morning, after three hours have passed.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	However, bloodletting that is administered should be done when there is convenience and necessity for it, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and at any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it should be that a child should not be bloodletted until they are fourteen years old, and a woman who is pregnant should not be bloodletted except from the fourth month to the seventh, and elderly people who have passed sixty years should not be bloodletted.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wants to be bloodletted in any way, it is necessary for them to clean their bowels before the bloodletting with an enema, if there is retained feces in them, so that the veins do not draw superfluous substances into the bloodletting of the cleansed bowels, which are pure, and so they do not affect the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	Do not perform venesection on patients suffering from seasickness or drunkenness, nor when they are ill with fever and intoxication until such time as their blood has settled, nor in cases of dropsy. Also avoid venesection during colic pain and vomiting, and after eating or exercising, and during times of frequent coitus, work, or exercise following fasting or staying awake, and for any cause that weakens the body or animal nature.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And in consideration of the subtlety of humors, if the blood is thick, avoid certain foods and drinks, and medicines if it is at all possible to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then take a bath if no cause prohibits it, or exercise in some way to make the blood more subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And avoid venesection at the height of the day, which is around the hour of terce, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And be careful that the time of day for that patient is protected from all bad animal accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all physical activities, such as work and excessive labor, intercourse, and similar things.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at the time of his treatment, have present the causes that are used in the custom of men for aromatics and odors and balms and similar things according to the quantity and possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And let the person performing venesection sit on a seat that is higher than the seat of the patient who needs to be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then remove his arm, and wash it with soap by the venesectioner two or three times; and then wrap it with a bandage and bind it two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let the ligature be timely, for if the ligature is not equal or the ligature is too tight, then you must prevent the flow of blood; or if it is loose, and then you must strengthen the blood flow accordingly.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And regarding the ligature, it is necessary that the one who is to be bled rub their arms vigorously until the veins are swollen and clearly visible.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And regarding the phlebotomy, the phlebotomist should anoint their lancet with a little old oil properly. Then place your left hand index finger on the vein where you intend to perform the phlebotomy so that the vein moves slightly and the percussion is steady; when you find the vein as if it were like a string fleeing from the phlebotomy, and those veins are full of air. When you press the lancet onto that vein, it does not yield, and if it yields, then that vein is constricted, and the phlebotomist becomes confused; and if the lancet does not puncture the vein, and if it does puncture, then that vein is narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And thus, it is necessary for the phlebotomist to be firm and attentive in all these matters.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then press the lancet, but if the vein is hard in one spot, that is where it should be; otherwise, repeat this at another spot nearby, or over an inflammation, if the area is not abscessed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area is abscessed, or if the patient becomes weaker, then you should leave it for a day or two, and do not bind it tightly, as this will draw the abscess out too quickly, nor should they bathe.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	Regarding venesection, if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the aperture is small and the blood flows gently, and you fear that not enough blood will flow to reach your desired amount, then repeat the venesection in that area with straightness and adjust slightly at the aperture, but do this quickly before the site becomes inflamed, for the site often becomes inflamed after a short time with just a small incision.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if you see that the area is already inflamed, then do not repeat the incision there, as it will serve no purpose for you; instead, apply some poultice of oil to that area, as it helps to guide the flow of blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And in this case, oil is better than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, apply a poultice of oil to all venesections where the veins are close to the surface of the body, and do this with theriac or al-fadhaj when applied over the area, for the blood becomes finer and less thickened when it is flowing freely.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large abscess forms at the site of the venesection, which sometimes happens, especially to someone who has not been bled before or made a small incision in the vein, then you should treat it by applying a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly heated, to that area for about an hour, as this will help dissolve it.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And it is necessary to do this near the flow of blood from that vein or from another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if a black or green discoloration remains in the area for several days, do not be concerned; and if you wish, apply some poultice of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some preparation of mint juice or collyrium or something similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	From such swellings it happens that abscesses and elevations require phlebotomy from the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	Therefore, place your hand on it, and if you find softness, apply pressure to it; then that elevation is evil and bad. And so be careful not to do anything as has been mentioned, for the blood will flow easily from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply an ointment with styptic properties to that area so the location becomes hardened, and then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And it is necessary to extract blood from everyone according to the quantity of their strength and according to the color appearing on top of the blood.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, then let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see it thick, then let it flow until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is acute, until the sharpness of it abates.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And for one who is full and strong and has a need for bloodletting at once, the phlebotomy of the vein should be increased and the bloodletting should be gradual.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for one who is weak, the opposite should be done, and it is necessary to let blood in small amounts, and the procedure should be slow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best method for venous phlebotomy is to use section transverse, not puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy is safe from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more effective and safer than phlebotomy based on latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	In such cases where fainting often occurs due to phlebotomy, it is necessary that you treat this before the phlebotomy with a small piece of bread infused in grape juice or simple oxymel heated; and extract from the blood three times or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if the patient is of a melancholic temperament, then take before the phlebotomy bread infused in myrrh syrup or in aromatic honey sweetened with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or in an aromatic and pleasing syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs during phlebotomy and is caused by the loss of too much blood, then it is necessary that they drink water and a pleasing aromatic syrup; and use aromatics such as rose petals, and place them on their temples with that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of the chapter on fainting due to evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And for one who wishes to prevent the stiffness of their arm and dissolve their blood a second time, it is necessary that the phlebotomy be for moderate evacuation, and its effect should be gradual, as it slowly evacuates the blood little by little, which is according to the quantity of the strength over continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But for one who wishes to prevent the stiffness of their arm and reduce their blood a second time, and whose body is strong, then it should be done about seven hours or nine after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But for one who wishes to draw the blood from their body in the opposite direction to the side towards which it inclines, it is necessary that this be done on the second day or the third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	May that body in which the blood has become heated and inflamed and causes fever be bled in one session, and let a large quantity of blood be taken out so as to prevent fainting, but you should maintain all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on the pulse of the side from which the blood is being drawn, lest death occur instead of fainting, for often this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And when you wish to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, since the orifices of the vein are now closed and it is difficult for the blood to flow out, do not press too forcefully or bend it sharply, for this is very bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Handle the patient until he can be bled again; or consider that the inflammation of the phlebotomy has caused coagulation in the vein's opening; or apply on it turpentine, or sage, and compress it gently until the blood is completely out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood a second time and there is no excuse to avoid it, then bleed at that site or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "the cord of the arm" is bled in place of the fossa or basilic vein when they are not accessible or hidden, for it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient should immerse their hand in cold water until it turns red and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	About this bandage for the middle stricture; and about phlebotomy across the small transverse part, not latitudinally nor longitudinally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	Let the incision be wide, and let your phlebotomy be at that place where you perform phlebotomy on the hand, near a joint, in a small area.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is restricted, now you should immerse the hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your goal.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are during the days of summer, then you are excused from immersing the hand in hot water, and similarly, pause the flow of blood in hot water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because there are no pulsating veins or nerves nearby.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the right forearm vein is appropriate for diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of this phlebotomy is that you bind the hand with a bandage or with your hand, after placing it in hot water, until the vein becomes swollen and is clearly visible; then make the incision transversely; and if you cut too deeply, do not proceed further.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And be careful not to leave your hand on the phlebotomy site for too long, because there are nerves of the aforementioned area that are exposed.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then immerse the hand in hot water and let the blood run out there, because if you do not immerse it in hot water, the blood will coagulate at the venous opening, preventing its flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when you have extracted the blood in the quantity necessary, pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it does not heal too quickly; and similarly, you should do this for all wounds.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The benefit of phlebotomy from the vein on my left hand is that it is helpful for ailments of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in the phlebotomy as you have done with the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of the phlebotomy from the sephena vein is for ailments located in the lower part of the body, such as disorders of the legs, and for retention of menstruation, and for diseases of the joints and ulcerations of old wounds, and similar conditions.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the procedure for phlebotomy from that vein is that the patient should put their foot in hot water and rub it until the veins become visible; and place a bandage around the ankle; and the location of the vein is on the back of the heel, and from there its branches spread over the surface of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore, phlebotomize the larger branch or below the joint behind the heel, because it is better and more effective.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform phlebotomy on that part of the foot, then be careful of the nerves located below that area on the surface of the foot, and pause your phlebotomy at a point where you would cut across it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the phlebotomy be gentle.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	If bleeding is prohibited, then place the foot in hot water and let the blood flow out until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist errs on the first attempt, then place the phlebotomy again slightly above it, since the location is suitable; and do not fear any harm, but be cautious of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And do the same for the vein on the other foot equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, the location as we have said is below the heel behind the arch of the foot.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the time for phlebotomy is when the patient feels pain in the hip when bloodletting is necessary.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient enter a bath, and quickly and tightly wrap the leg from the waist below the heel with a strip of cloth about four fingers wide in a bandage, as it should only appear by this method.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then perform phlebotomy on that area according to each angle as is possible and along the transverse direction, which is better; or incise that area by incision or cut that area by cutting, since the location is suitable.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in words like a half-moon; and if you find that area and it does not appear completely to the touch, then perform phlebotomy on one of its branches, which appears between the thumb and the ring finger of the foot.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be careful of the nerves, and let the amount of blood flow that you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then disengage the constriction and place a ligature on the site of the phlebotomy and strengthen the area, for it will heal quickly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	On wind exposure and the qualities of using those [methods].
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Wind exposures are specifically for horns, or ears, or hands.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And wind exposure is done in two ways: one involves incision and extraction of blood, and the other is wind exposure without incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this wind exposure that is without incision is done in two ways, as it can be with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And for the wind exposures that are administered with incision and extraction of blood, there are fourteen sites on the body. Of these, one is located at the back of the head; another is in the middle of both sides of the neck; wind exposures under the chin below the jaw and beside the mouth; wind exposures of the two cheeks; wind exposures of the throat, which is near the end of the neck; wind exposures of two armpits; wind exposures of two elbows; and wind exposures of two knees.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Wind exposure does not extract blood but rather from the small scattered veins in the flesh, and through this method, one does not capture the virtue as with phlebotomy; nor is it necessary for wind exposure to be done with fire or without fire in any illness caused by internal congestion until the entire body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	However, if necessity requires wind exposure for illness or as a continuous treatment, administer it at any time at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, in the middle of the month, and at certain intervals.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that among men in whom blood multiplies within due to extraction by bleeding and finds heaviness and hardness in their head; and of those, it causes fullness and stiffness in their face and head, and in their neck; and of those who show prudence in their face and forehead, darkness and dullness in their eyes; and of those whose location for bleeding is there; and of those whose laughter multiplies; and of those who taste blood in their mouth, or whose tongue is clogged and spits blood; and of those whose sleep multiplies, and of those who see blood in their sleep stiffness, troubles, plagues, and other causes like them.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when you encounter any of those causes, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, I then command bleeding to be performed two or three hours before sunset.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the benefit of bleeding from the neck is that when you encounter heaviness in the head and sinking in the eyes; but it should be done near complete evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this bleeding is in the location for phlebotomy of the cephalic vein.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not advisable to use it for one who is completely fatigued, or in the one who has a cold, because it causes great harm to them.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason, it is not appropriate to use it on the elderly and those whose heads are frequently ill.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But for one who is continuously leaning over it, forgetfulness may occur; and for this reason, you should command the person performing the bleeding to pause their hand briefly when removing the cup from below, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Here is the translation:
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	If the winded bladder is pressed a little, because if it is left below, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the windedness from the left side causes pains in the head, eye disorders, swelling, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is the place for phlebotomy at the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And you should command the wind-bleeder not to press too hard so as not to cause incisions in the artery and prevent blood flow.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And the windedness below the chin causes bad breath in the mouth, and corruption of the gum, and resembles the symptoms of diseases that are in the mouth, and is the place for phlebotomy at aliheric which is between the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But the windedness that is performed on the two temples causes cephalalgia, which is caused by an excess of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the windedness of both sides inside the ears causes relief from phlebotomy of three veins, which are the basilica, fusca, and cephalic, because it attracts blood from all those larger veins that are in the flesh, and from the smaller veins of other thicker veins until the attraction reaches the three main veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the wind-bleeder not to proceed too much in incision, because the area is bare of flesh and below it are nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a windedness on which wind-bleeding is performed over the buttocks and causes hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers below.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you command the surgeon that there be a strong cauterization, and it should be of iron, for the place requires a strong drying; and let thin cauteries be applied lightly drawn over and it should be scarified with a scarifier.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Strong cauteries from the smaller cups with meticulous care, for they draw blood from the entire body and alleviate ancient pains of the loins and uterus, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruation and help against boils and hemorrhoids; and they serve as a substitute for venesection at two saphenous points, in the armpit, and at two chafing points.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, they weaken the entire body and cause fainting in some men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And the armpit cauterization is appropriate for the armpit in the same way as the cauterizations with two cups are for other parts.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the cauteries is that you place the cauterization gently at first and then suck it appropriately timed, and do not prolong the placement of the cauteries, but pause those lightly, and remove them cautiously, so that the humors come to the site by natural occurrence.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop repeating this and continue until you see the area turn red and swell, and until the rigidity of the blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And now you should scarify and repeat the suction gradually, and appropriately consider the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For the person who has tender flesh with few pores, you should scarify them once and not more, so that the area is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	He commands the operator to enlarge the incision slightly and to facilitate suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thick, now you should scarify twice, because on the first occasion the way of absorption for the blood and the moisture is opened up.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But on the second occasion, use the acquired inspection for extracting the thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is mixed with impurities, now a third scarification should be performed so that the last can be achieved.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or in small amounts, one scarification is sufficient for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a large amount of blood, we perform multiple scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, now it is necessary to scarify in larger quantities.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scarification refers to the depth of the incision alone.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the skin of the person where the incision is to be made is thick, hard, dark, and the pores are narrow, it is necessary that the areas for applying the cupping vessels be anointed with soothing, opening, and resolving oils; if it is summer, then oil of aloes, violet oil, or oil of rose petals, or linseed oil; and if it is winter, then narcissus oil, lily oil, camomile oil, or similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick and congealed, then the oil should be of amaranth, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or anise oil, and similar.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the wound is of broad holes in tender flesh, it is necessary that it be covered with oil, and it should have applied to those areas around the wound water washed or warm water mixed with solatrum, or water of colocynth, or water of boric acid, and similar things.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for the one whose blood is of thick humidity, wash his wounds with green vinegar, or with water of myrtle and sumac, and similar things.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for the one whose superfluities are thick, wash his wounds with old vinegar, or with water of hyssop, which is marjoram, or of fennel decoction, or chamomile, and similar things.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it is necessary that the dressing be protected before bathing; having bathed, it should be administered immediately after the bath for an hour or two, and it should rest near the wound.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is needed to be done to regulate the patient after bloodletting or before wound dressing.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	At the beginning, consider this: if the wound or the one who needs bloodletting is choleric and there is inflammation with acute bleeding, then it is necessary to give cooling causes, such as sour grapes, endive in green vinegar and lettuce, and scallions, and julep, and similar things.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause their food such as poultry, and meat of suitable birds, and foods seasoned with vinegar, and similar things.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for the one whose complexion is warm, it is necessary that they drink rose syrup, or syrup of boiled fenugreek seeds and sumac, and vinegar mixed with moderate aromatic substances between morning and night; and that it be recommended to them to use little drinking and eating, and pause foods such as poultry and canaries and pigeons and small birds and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	On the day of bloodletting and purging, drink more than you eat.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	It should be given to drink at certain times to some people theriac or musk medicine, such as nutmeg or cinnamon before bloodletting or purging, so that the principal members are comforted and the blood is refined; and it is not appropriate for them to take hot substances.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	The bloodlettings that should be done by incision should be performed on the thighs, above the groin, and for gout and hernia, and at the navel, in the places of the groins, and at the side of the hip bone, because these members cannot tolerate incisions.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not used for anything else but to draw blood from a member, just as we place a cup on the breast in cases of bleeding from the nose; and they use this method to dissolve congealed blood in the limb, just as we apply it to the abdomen and navel; because this thins the limb, heats it, alleviates pain, and resolves congestion.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is applied to the nostrils when they are obstructed or diseased, because by the power of suction it easily removes obstructions and eradicates diseases from their location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly when it is applied to the groin and abdomen for bloodletting in cases where blood is confined there.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these bloodlettings should be administered only with suction; some, however, should be applied using heat.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some should be applied full of hot water in diseases affecting the abdomen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	With this you are to make sure that the windiness is full and is much larger, so it is hot water alone or water in which herbs suitable for this have been boiled.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Windiness administered near the fire: let the width of its opening be two fingers wide as we have formed it; and the quantity of the liquid should be half a palm; and at the bottom of it, in the place that is around the circumference, let there be half of it; the tube should be small according to the amount that fits inside a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made of soft leather or citrus peel, with thick edges, lion (likely referring to a material or style), smooth and clean so that it does not hurt the limb due to its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And there should be a crossbar of wood or iron in the middle of it, upon which a candle is placed near the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this windiness should be larger than the one we have recommended; and the size smaller according to the illnesses and the condition of the one who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the windiness for children and weak individuals should be smaller than those for young and robust people.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this windiness near the fire on the member is that it extends the flesh towards the fire appropriately in front of a small candle made of wax, and place it in the middle of the crossbar at the proper location of the windiness, so that the fire is ignited around the lower part to prevent it from burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And it should be placed appropriately on the member of the patient, and the finger should be on the tube that we have mentioned, so that when we have the windiness and do not want the finger to obstruct the vapor from rising over that tube, at that time the windiness will dissolve quickly.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	Thus for burning plasters according to its method, and repeat that if you should need of them.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Make a suction cup that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, with water, in which there should be no transverse rib or obstacle, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and is placed on the limb for only so long.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And this suction cup, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a greater quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter XCVM VII.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Lancets are not administered to all members but only to those members where the placement of suction cups is impossible due to their small size, such as the gums and similar areas; or on parts of the body without much flesh, such as the fingers and nose and similar areas.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found is to use them in the waters from putrid places that are clean.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then leave them in putrid water during the day and night until they become hungry, so that no residue remains in their body; and then evacuate the body at the beginning of phlebotomy and suction cup use; and then rub the patient's limb until it reddens; and then place them on the affected area.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and placed.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if suction can be applied to the area with a suction cup, it is better for relief.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the area with vinegar and then with water; and it should be rubbed and pressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the blood is prolonged near the seat of the bloodletting and it oozes out, then you wrap a cloth in cold water, and place that on top so that the oozing stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood multiplies, then powder and sprinkle on it vitriol trisected, or alum and similar substances that cause astringency, until the blood is arrested; or place on the area the pods of boiled fava beans, and leave them there until the beans adhere to the area, and the blood is arrested.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if it is necessary to repeat bloodletting, do so when it is possible to change the sites.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if bloodletting is prohibited by suspension, then rub the area with fresh blood or prick the area until blood flows; and afterwards place on it, for those who feel some blood will soon adhere.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to clot, sprinkle on them a little powdered aloe, or salt, or ash, and they will clot immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the chapter of the third part: on restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is considered necessary in the art of medicine; it deals with the restoration of fractures and dislocations of bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, be aware that this chapter is boasted about by foolish doctors and the vulgar, and by those who have not for any length of time regarded the books of the Ancients or read a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is done that this method of the scientists in our land is kept private; and I have not forgotten it for any length of time at all; and I have not adopted what follows, but through long reading of the books of the Ancients and studying to understand them, from which I extracted the science.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And thus I directed myself to experiments and studies throughout the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and upon which I have experimented; for I have abridged it for you and delivered it from the occupation of lengthiness; and I have abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation; and I have shown it at the end of declaration; and formed in it various forms of the instruments used therein, as is done by addition of declaration, just as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	A summary and collection from the treatment of fractures of bones, from those whose preliminary steps are necessary before we begin to recall the treatments of different types of fractures and their various aspects.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the discourse; and the chapters to which one must pay attention at the beginning in order to understand them correctly; for it is necessary that you and those who wish to learn this noble art from you know these well.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when it happens to someone that they have a fracture, dislocation, torsion, or fall, at that moment you must decide at the beginning whether to perform venesection or to dress them immediately, if no cause prohibits it, such as weakness of strength, or if it is an infant who has happened to them, or an elderly person in decline, or if it is a time of intense heat or cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And therefore be content with food that is light, such as fresh herbs and meat of birds and small animals; and prohibit heavy meats and foods that fill the body, and all food that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure of a safe condition regarding abscesses, and if you do not fear an effusion of matter to the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	Then return the patient to their usual regimen as soon as they are accustomed to it.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the broken bone begins to be restored, now it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious foods that are moist and heavy, such as those made of wheat cooked with water, rice, peas, beef tripe, hens, fresh pork, and similar meats, and with this regimen the healing of the fracture occurs more easily and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that bones broken in people who are young and in the elderly cannot be repaired and consolidated according to their nature through the drying up of the limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are repaired and consolidated according to their nature throughout the drying up of those members, and similarly repaired and consolidated are those that remain until the end of adolescence, just like the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature adjusts and applies them around the broken bone from all sides in a manner similar to glue, where there is thickness that adheres and strengthens it as they coagulate together until they reach strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning does not prevent it from accomplishing its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to withhold from the patient foods that are heavy and viscous and thick, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The treatment for fractures varies according to the diversity of the member. 
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the thigh is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the arm; and similarly all other members are different among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I wish to remind you of every type of fracture, explained in its own separate chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Note the diversity of fractures within themselves.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the types of bone fractures are diversified within themselves; for one type of arch-shaped fracture is different from those that occur in the stars; and some fractures are according to the length of the bone: and among the fractures of the shaft, splinters, and closed and open fractures, there are also fractures like when a pen is prepared for writing, and there is a fracture due to plague and disruption in the head, and there is a small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And each type has its own proper treatment in the restoration, which will be a reminder of them separately in their places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Note the signs of a bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this, a bone fracture is known: there is a deformity of the bone, and from its prominence and appearance to the touch, and also when you press it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, when there is no apparent deformity or swelling and upon gentle touch when you touch the bone with movement and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	There might be a deformity or small fissure, so do not press it with your hand and with strong compression. Instead, apply one of the medicines about which there will be a reminder at an appropriate moment for what is suitable; and it may be narrow due to subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that when the place is arched and not divided into two or any other part than where it suffers from swelling, then you should begin your work with the correction of the wound that the abscess affects.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess affects it, then leave it for some days until the abscess subsides; and afterward bandage it in whatever way you can, making it light and secure.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration and adjustment of the flesh is easier than that of the bone in which the swelling occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen it according to what will be remembered of it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if the bone is swollen, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from both parts, whether it is a hand or a foot; or use your hand if the member is small; or two cords or one cord and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And place yourself in such a position that you can put the limb down bandaged according to its natural figure, while the parts that are extended from the broken member require you to return those addictions securely and in whatever way you can back into their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful according to your strength that no harm comes to the patient due to your operation or injury; and strive according to your ability to apply one bone to its companion bone in their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is necessary that at that opportune moment you use your hand effectively, and if you find any differing cause, correct it and bandage it according to the extent of your skill.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And from the excessive extension and compression, so do some foolish doctors cause an abscess through their operation, or they cause contraction in the limb as we have seen this happen due to their foolish operations.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And appropriately attach, with proper alignment and careful operation and restriction of that limb, and rest and tranquility; warn the patient about this and see that he does no harm to it during his waking hours and while sleeping, and observe its revolution and agitation, and note all its movements with full attention; and wait until the position of the limb is such that the pain is assured, which cause is because when it is in a position of pain or injury; then it is necessary to change it to another position where there is no pain; and be careful that this position is straight and equal, so that no tortuosity occurs to the limb when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the restriction of the tranquil limb is what I recommend; for you to know that broken limbs vary in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small like the arm and the finger and the wrist and similar to these, then it is necessary that the wrapping be of soft fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But for those that are large like the thigh or the chest, it is necessary to wrap them in linen and hard material, because the linen wrapping connects the large limb and strengthens it evenly from all sides, thus preventing any impurity from entering.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And appropriately begin, with proper alignment of the evacuation, to pause gradually according to this, on the site of the fracture with three wrappings or four depending on what the limb requires; and strengthen it gently with your hand along the bandaging.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And apply to it the most sovereign poultice for the place of the fracture, and bind it gently so as not to restrict the area where you have bound the place of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And apply an extension to the wrapping of the fracture site for a short period, and gradually loosen the bandage until you have removed most of it.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it around the fractured site over the previous wrapping, and afterwards apply to it the dressings below the fracture; and let your operation be in the tightening of the dressing and in the loosening of it as we have said about the first dressing above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place between the dressings a piece of leather or cloth on which the curvature of the fracture is modeled, if there is any curvature; and if not, do not place anything in that area.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place another bandage over it, and afterwards apply properly made splints over these dressings if there is no swelling or abscess in the area, and now place on what causes the abscess and reduces the swelling; and leave this for several days; and now bind the splints over it.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the splints be about half a cubit long and carefully crafted; or they can be made of willow wood; or from palm strips; and let the width of each splint be according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the splint placed over the fracture should be slightly thicker and longer than the others, and the length of the splint according to how it fits the limb in size; and then bind over the splints with another bandage as per your first binding; and afterwards cover it above properly as we have said about binding, and this binding should be tighter near the fracture site, and as it moves away from the fracture, the binding should become looser.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And let the threads be moderate in thickness and fineness, and let them be of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen some foolish paunches use cords of twisted thread for their sewing, it is a great error, when you see the stitches not lying straight.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And also very fine threads are not suitable, for you will not be able to achieve with them what you want by sewing, and it is necessary that there be more than a finger's width between stitch and stitch.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is suffering from pain at the ends of the ribs near the stitches in those places, then pause and use silk or carded wool between that and the skin so that it does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes a fracture occurs due to a blow, and a disruption happens in the collarbone, and I will recall this case in the chapter dedicated to its uniqueness.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not all broken members should be set with splints on the first day; the reason for this is that when the member is large, it should not be placed upon splints immediately but rather after two or three days or more, according to your certainty about the danger of suppuration.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of the plasters with which the Ancients treated fractures, dislocations, and twists, which were applied over such injuries.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of making a plaster for the rapid restoration of fractures, suitable for delicate individuals and especially for women and children, as it does not attract heat or irritation: take powdered flour, which is the fine part that adheres to the sides of the mill during grinding.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And confine it as it is, but sift it with white cloth, and pause the compounding of it not thin nor subtle; and then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method for plasters to treat fractures, dislocations, and twists: recipe of asafetida, of ledanum, of acacia, of inula, and migraach, which is the root of wild millet, of each a drachm x; of myrrh and aloes one drachm v; alchaichol two drachms xx; all should be dried, sifted, and mixed with watered alchaichol or with white cloth if the composition of the mixture is too hot; and then use this plaster, for it has a good composition and quickly restores broken bones, and helps many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method for a plaster to treat fractures and twists: recipe of migraach (root of wild millet) and extract of white alum, one drachm x; myrrh and aloes one drachm v; acacia six drachms vi; Armenian bole two drachms xx.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All should be triturated in a mortar with a pounding tool, and then sifted, and compounded with water or white cloth if the mixture is too thick, and it should be administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method for a plaster for joints and bones separated from their places, and for severe pain in them and for fissures and fractures: take clean wool and immerse it in sour wine and warm oil and apply it to the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	Moreover, in this plaster there is no virtue for restoration, for abscesses, and it does not properly expel pains.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method for a plaster that restores a broken bone: take fresh leaves of the fig tree and wild poppy; crush them together and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of preparing a poultice to administer for the restoration of a bone fracture and when you wish to resolve the remnant of an abscess: take one part each of marshmallow root, chamomile flowers, violets, and flour of barley; mix all these finely and cook them in water, provided that the limb is not inflamed.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is inflamed, now prepare that with cold coriander water or with plain cold water.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of preparing a stronger poultice for resolving an issue more effectively than the first one, when there is a hard abscess during the restoration of a limb: take equal parts of marshmallow root and linseed, pomegranate flowers, melilot, marjoram, violets, chamomile; mix all these finely and cook them in vinegar-water or warm water or wine, whichever suits the condition of the limb and its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	However, Hippocrates does not say in his book that a poultice should be applied to the broken limb during its restoration but rather recommends cerot made of wax and oil for no other reason; he also advises that it should be midway between being thick and fine.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	However, Galen is seen to have applied poultices to the broken limb during its restoration and for causes such as slight drying with a bit of heat, like myrrh, onions, and similar to those causes which we have mentioned.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of preparing a poultice to relieve injury and pain: take equal parts of linseed, chickpeas, chopped human hair or bird's down, marshmallow root, and salt; mix these finely and sieve them, then cook them together to make a poultice.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The quantity according to which it is necessary that the bandage remain and then be removed is such that you should consider whether pain does not occur or progress nor is the bone broken from its place; therefore, do not untie it for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if intense pain, swelling, or inflammation occurs at the site, then you should be cautious or loosen it at that hour, and remove the plaster.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a piece of cloth and sponge the sea lemon with water, and immerse it in warm water; then use that to wash the area until the swelling subsides and the pain is alleviated; afterwards let the limb rest for an hour; then place it on wool soaked in vinegar and oil or ointment, and bandage it overnight until you are sure of no abscess formation, and that the limb's swelling has subsided, and the pain from it has been reduced.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards repeat that gentle compression and small plaster without making it as tight as your first one, and gradually do this until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you find that the abscess and hardness and pain and swelling and all other symptoms have subsided completely, and you need a plaster and compression, then repeat that as you did at the beginning, gradually.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no cause arises for the limb of those we have mentioned, then do not untie it until after three days or four or ten or seven; and sometimes all of this is left for twenty days, as appears appropriate to you by unbinding the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and tends toward the coagulation of the flesh over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	During the operation adjust more tightly at the point of constriction than at your first tightening altogether, and adjust according to the swelling of the diseased tissue, as was previously mentioned.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	But if you see the site of the fracture drying up and becoming more distressed than it should, then you know that nutrition is prevented from reaching there; therefore, apply tepid water compresses to it every time you do so; and continue this for three days in total; and loosen the bandage slightly, and through this operation direct nutrition to the member, and it will be quickly healed.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But what the foolish restorers of a fractured limb do otherwise when it is not restored at the beginning as it should be, and is restored according to its tortuosity, is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if this were true, the Ancients would have enlarged upon it in their books and warned against it.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do that, which is why it is more reasonable to assume that they do not do so.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter Second: On fractures when they occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a blunt object, where the impact displaces all the bone inward, which is behind the bone, just as it would in wood, and thus this type is called an "ascial" fracture; or a sharp object cuts some part of the bone and cuts through the flesh but does not pass the cut inward to the back of it; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	This is about the injury of these two fractures, either it is great or small, and of the fracture that is comminuted or crushed; and the cause of them is percussion by a weak object or falling on a stone, and similar things.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating, which already approaches the panniculus, which is below the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the injury of these two fractures is either great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of the fracture that is weakened in the bone, in the subtlety of the hairline, and for this reason this particular type of fracture is called a capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is caused either by falling or by the impact of a stone and similar things, which causes some lamina of the bone to enter into its inner parts, and it occurs in the concave location just as it happens with ribs when they suffer an impact and break upon their inward entry.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this is more commonly done in the bones of children, just as it happens with the heads of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And for all these types of fractures, treatments are used, which are remedies applied separately.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will return to the recall of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And you will recognize all these types of fractures by examination on them and by inquiry into their painful areas and the appearance of corrupted flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary fracture is recognized by this: it appears on the bone, and when it is cleaned, it is treated over the painful area because the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures consider at first the symptoms of the patient, and if you see through these symptoms that it signifies by clear indication great fear, as is vomiting from anger, and stretching out, and loss of understanding, and hoarseness of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and such things of the limbs and stiffness of them, and similar to those of the symptoms in the major dispositions, without doubt he will not be healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see unusual symptoms that give hope of health, then you begin the treatment of the fracture.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	When the cause is such that it has come to you as a complaint at the beginning as it is in this case and this is during the winter days, then it is necessary for you to study the condition of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all dispositions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is during the summer days, then it is necessary for you to expose the bone before the seventh day, because what is next to the bone may become corrupted by pus, and such symptoms as we have mentioned may occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the membrane covering the brain and is in small fragments and abrasions, then it is necessary for you to incise the fragmented and abraded part as I will tell you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And you should shave the head of the patient who is affected, and uncover the bone according to custom and method as best you can according to the shape of the injury, so that it is clear on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you that you need to detect the bone, or there is bleeding or an abscess requiring cautery, then you should prepare for what is necessary, and that is to apply the area with cloths infused in wine and oiled cloth, and let the wound rest until the abscess subsides and bleeding stops; then begin circumferential treatment of the bone and its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	In water let it be done according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one method is that you incise the bone with an incisor of such size, and this is its shape: And then apply another incisor, this one slightly wider than the previous; and this is its shape:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then apply an even wider incisor than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is necessary to have various incisors, some wider than others and some shorter than the rest; they should be sharp at both ends, and made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in percussion on the incisors so that you do not jar the head and injure it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is hard and strong, it is necessary to perforate around it before you apply the incisors along with the chisels, which are called non-deep chisels.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are called this only because these do not reach the inner part of the skull bone when used around it; thus, the chisel has a rounded end or margin on top, similar to an edge or small circle that prevents it from penetrating too deeply into and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take many of these chisels, each suited to the thickness of each bone, so that you have at hand for all parts of the skull an end that is sharp, with the quantity in length and width according to the amount of thickness of this part.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the form of three kinds of trephines: The quality of piercing in the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the trephine on the bone and revolve it with your hand until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then change the trephine to another location, and continue this process throughout the extent of the thickness of the ray or around about that.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then incise with an incisor that which is between each piece of the bone, and do it as finely as you can at the end of lightness, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, or with your hand, or by any other cause through some instruments that you have prepared for this purpose, such as probes and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And it is necessary that you guard with all caution that the incisor does not touch any part of the brain.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And so when you have perforated the bone in a circuit, and it will be separated from the brain if it continues at that point, and you will extract it; then rasp and smooth that in the roughness of the place where it is in the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor, but it must be more thin and finer than other incisors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any part of the small bones remains and causes trouble, now take that with ease using what is appropriate from your instruments; and then treat the wound with lint and dressings as we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is light, distant from fear, which Gualia calls and the leaf praises greatly as a praiser; and this is the speech on it: It is necessary for you at the beginning to start uncovering the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most severe and most apparent, until when you have uncovered that part and you have placed below it the extremity of this incisor lent and cheerful whose form is as follows:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the lens-shaped part is lion and does not cut any cause, and the acute part is of it in two sides frontwards in length, as you see; that the lens-shaped part be adjusted to the ciphac with the face of it cutting acute on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And for this reason, you strike upon the saw of a part with a small hammer so that you cut through all the bone with ease as it revolves, and be sure concerning the flap that no accident happens to it in any way, and if the operator were the most foolish of all men and the least knowledgeable among them; certainly, and even if he were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Now if there is any cause attached to the bone of the flap in some places of bone, it will cut that which adheres to the end of the saw at the lens-shaped part, and it would deliver that which adheres with ease, for it is delivered from harm and fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the flap, and that which is excised or remains of the bone is its surface, and it remains with roughness and small protrusions, now you should scrape away that roughness and eradicate those protrusions with fine razors for which you have prepared various quantities so that it is possible for you to administer those most suitable in every place and the most appropriate of them according to how your operation on that broken bone and its shape directs you.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you should administer in your proportion at which you scrape the bone at the beginning with the widest of those razors, and then gradually use one increasingly finer, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the thinnest and finest of all of them.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In each of the other small fractures and subtle fractures, you should administer care according to what has been lost for the purpose of correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is because she is not intimidated by any of those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And this is about what we have written concerning large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the fatty tissue is rectangular when you remove the bone, now you should take a piece of cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and soak that in warm oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; then take another folded or triple-layered cloth and soak it in vinegar and warm oil, and place it over the first cloth; do this as lightly as possible so that you do not press on the swelling; then apply a wide bandage to it, but do not bind it too tightly except just enough for the wound.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave it with this treatment for one day or two until you are sure of the absence of abscess; then unbind it and administer medicines that are suitable for excessive dryness, such as lint poultices and flour mixtures, and powders of iris and aristolochia, and similar ones.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you should make these medicines into powder that is finely ground and applied to the wound as dry powders; generally, administer any medicine whose property is to cleanse without causing irritation.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be careful according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment remains clean; do not allow it to become infected or suffer from any other issues; and do not let its virulence increase. For when it is properly placed over the fatty tissue of the brain, it corrupts that tissue and weakens it, leading to further illness due to such malignancy.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the skull where the bone has been cleaned and especially when the treatment of it is delayed, and there is blackness on its surface; and therefore consider the hours if such accidents happen to the patient, so that you know it is dangerous without any doubt.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is not blackness but the medicine that has been applied above which causes this darkness, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of olive oil, and with these wet a cloth, and then place that on the skull; and afterwards treat it with the spices for healing until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is cut.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken except into two parts above mostly, or one of those sometimes, because there are two bones in it, as the lower part is cartilaginous and does not break, and only swelling, distortion, and curvature happens to it.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you should insert your finger into the side of the nose, and adjust that fracture with your middle finger inside and support it with your thumb outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this with ease, and be careful that your operation does not cause pain to the patient.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then you should equalize it at the end of the rod which is slightly thick.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then make it look like this.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And if you can perform the restoration on the first day of the fracture, do so; and if not, then on the seventh or tenth day, proceed with the rest when the swelling subsides.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And immediately insert into the end of the nose a plug of linen cloth if the fracture is in one piece, or place two cloths if the fracture is in two pieces, and make sure that the cloth is thick enough to fill the cavity of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient restorers say that the cloths should be soaked in boiled honey, and changed every day, but I have not seen this myself; however, it is advisable to soak the plug in albumen of cooked eggs mixed with powder of rue; and then leave the cloth inside until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes a piece of wax is inserted into the nose instead of cloth, wrapped in linen cloth; and this should be done when the fracture of the nose is very severe and the patient is prohibited from inhaling.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this method is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do it this way, and if you wish, use cloths.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another swelling occurs, apply a plaster to the nose with cerate or wax soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with honey water.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if no swelling occurs, then it is advisable to apply a plaster outside with sesame flour and powdered herbs mixed with egg white; and then place it over the injured area, and do not cover the nose with anything.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If bones of the nose are broken in a small fracture or crushed, then at that time it is necessary to cut around them and extract them with instruments suitable for this; and promptly close the fracture, and treat it with substances that heal and strengthen, and with plasters appropriate for this.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if it happens that there is a swelling inside the nose, then at that time it is necessary to treat this with poultices and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the lower jaw is broken and there is no swelling at the fracture site, then check if the fracture is only on the surface and not split into two parts with curvature inside, in this case its diagnosis is easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And you must, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert your right finger; and push the swelling of the fracture from inside with ease to the outside parts, using your other hand from the outside part of the bone; do this gently and steadily.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you must administer extension of both parts according to straightness as much as possible until they are aligned.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a concussion of the teeth leading to disruption, then strengthen those you expect will break with wire or silver or thread; and promptly place on the broken jaw some wax, and then place over it a double cloth, and place over that a large piece of clean cloth, or a pad of softened dough equal in length to the jaw; and then bind it tightly according to how your bandaging equipment is prepared and suits the application, without causing destruction.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And he commands the patient to use rest and tranquility, and to stop eating liquid foods.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you see that the shape has already been altered in any way, then on the third day you should examine and loosen it; afterwards, correct what has already been altered with powder of myrrh, egg albumen, or flour of linseed, after you have stopped the cerement from it, and place upon the dressing a piece of linen.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then when it stands attached and adjusted that plaster upon it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave that, so do not loosen it until it is healed and the fracture strengthened; for often this fracture is strengthened in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if on another occasion an abscess occurs, then administer what we have said often in the treatment of it until it is healed, and let that abscess be drained.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is with a splinter, then consider whether it is a piece of bone separated or embedded, and carefully extract those splinters with what is necessary for their removal using instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the splinter is narrow, then enlarge it with a scalpel according to the amount necessary.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then when you have stopped those splinters, and if they cannot be removed, close the opening of the splinter if it is wide; otherwise, place upon that one of the plasters which are suitable for it and promote healing there, until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the collarbone when it is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Most often the collarbone is broken in the part in front of the muscle, and that fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	For it is either broken, or separated, or separated into two parts without affecting the articulation; and it is easy to restore it. Or it happens in such a way that it affects the articulation, and its restoration is difficult. Or it is such that the fracture is along the flat surface.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the procedure in that case, when the fracture is along the flat surface, is to have two assistants present, so that one holds the supporting instrument and guides the broken collarbone, while the other extends the neck towards that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And similarly, adjust the fracture within the bone so that its shape is formed as needed, and there should be neither a small prominence nor a depression in it.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then place below the armpit a pad made of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to your necessity; extend and raise the collarbone and compress the pad with your hand until you adjust the fracture as needed.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the end of the collarbone to the outer parts, so that it reaches the preon, then have the patient lie supine on their neck, and place a pad about halfway in size over the muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant presses the muscle from below so that the bone of the collarbone is raised to reach the preon, and then you correct the fracture and adjust it as needed.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel pain from the fork and its points, now it is necessary to cut around them and extract those pricks easily.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is stuck in the bone, now you must devise an incision with one of the cutters that you have prepared for this purpose, since you have paused below the fork the instrument that serves as a reamer; and this tool is made of wood or iron, and here is its shape:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it resembles the cup from which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to what you need for it, depending on the size of the bone or the space available.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	However, the length of it should be as much as is possible for the operation; it should have two ends as you see fit, and one end should be wide while the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when extracting the splinter from the bone is wide, and you are sure it may form an abscess, now you should approximate the two lips of the wound with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear it may form an abscess, now you should cover the wound with dressings and powders according to the size of the wound's opening.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess does occur, now apply a dressing soaked in vinegar and rose oil and place it over that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	However, when the bone needs to be immobilized due to the wound and its incision, you should apply a plaster made of flour and egg white, and place it over the padding. Then place the sphere under the splint if needed, and then take linen bandages about one palm wide; then sprinkle double powder on the pad and plaster; then take a thin board strip with a width of three fingers and similar length; then wrap this in cloth, and then wrap that cloth around the board strip at the site above the fracture location; then place soft material as padding underneath, and roll it over the neck and below the splint behind the fracture; then reduce it to all parts, and when you see the alignment of the fracture with proper alignment, this is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And do not let the splint press down on the broken bone; and therefore you should see the patient every day, so that when the bandaging is loose or you see that the splint has already been moved, then you must correct this and tighten the bandaging.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And place the patient's head on the pillow at the neck, and place below it the bolsters so that during sleep his head is slightly raised; thus the support of the shoulder blade will be raised, and therefore the fracture of the collarbone will be elevated by the muscle; or bind his arm to his neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the bandage unless it is necessary due to an abscess or other condition within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you see that his face is suitable for it, and adjust it to the constriction and restore it so that the fracture of the collarbone may be set and healed.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some people it is done in less time.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The scapula is broken in the middle part and not at its margins.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when it is broken at that location — and it is broken in the middle part of it — and this is known only by palpation, then according to the shape of the fracture prepare yourself and reduce it according to its natural figure in every way you can manage.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Here is the translation:
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If you place the blade in one of the concavities on the spatula, then wrap that concavity with a lion's paw and proceed to push the blade according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then apply pressure above with the metallic strip properly constricted and with firmness of the blade such that it does not move from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And check the bandage each day; and whenever it is softened, change it on another day and tighten it if the blade has moved from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And place the malady over its proper side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in 25 days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you remove the bandage, and be sure that these are bones for which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed to the place of the broken bone and place the bandage there, then you cut above it, remove it, and act as we have said for the fracture of the furcula or in case of an abscess that may occur here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of a fractured foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot sometimes is broken in the middle and remains intact, but the extremities move as cicadas do and are comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And when the middle of the foot is broken, the symptoms are that it tilts towards the inner parts and there is great pain, difficulty in movement, coughing, fever, vomiting blood; and a cavity forms in the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	For the restoration of the spine, lay the patient on their back and place a bolster between their shoulders; then press against the muscles, and adjust the ribs with two fingers, and delicately perform the operation and the correction in every possible way that is suitable for this, until the shape of the bone returns as it should.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then place the plaster and tow on it, and put a thin layer of linden bark or flax or something similar in lightness, after which you wrap that with cloth; then carefully bind that around the broken bone without putting too much pressure; and proceed to bandage following the roundness of the back several times, and tighten that moderately; then examine the bandage at all times, and when it softens, strengthen that.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity requires the removal of that due to corrosion or swelling, or pain, or an abscess that occurs in the area, then you should cut and loosen that, remove the plaster, and correct what has happened according to the method of treatment; then reapply the plaster if it is necessary for that; and adjust the binding until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that fractures of the ribs do not occur except in thick areas where they meet; and at their extremities in front, compression does not affect them because they are cartilaginous there.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the sensation during the examination of the aforementioned areas.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And so the restoration should be such that it equalizes the fracture according to the said method as much as possible, entering where necessary, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a splint if that is required.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs inclines towards the inner parts, it often causes severe pain and puncture-like sensations, just as those who have wept experience, and because of this, the bone places a covering over itself; and there is difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Ancients were skilled in that with skillful words.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And what they say is that one should avoid foods for the patient that generate inflammation and gas, so that the belly does not become swollen and distended, and the fracture is not pushed towards the outer parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But we should do this to ensure it does not become a light cause for generating a pus-filled abscess if one does not occur; and if it already has occurred, then this helps in dealing with it.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them say that it should be paused from wind-increasing foods and afterwards squeezed with strength; and this is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the wind will draw the superfluities to the place due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them say: the place should be covered with wool that has been submerged in hot oil, and powders should be placed between the ribs where it is full, so that the bandage is equal when wrapping it according to its roundness; afterwards, the patient should be treated for pleurisy with diet and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the patient is strongly constrained by the pain which they cannot endure, and the bone has punctured through the dressing, we fear for the patient; at that time it is necessary to cut across the location, uncover the broken edge, and immediately place over that instrument which will preserve the splinter whose preservation was previously mentioned, and cut the bone with ease, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And immediately adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitching, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs internally, then apply poultices of powdered herbs in warmed oil and place over the area, and cure the patient with what is appropriate for an internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And have the patient lie on their back on the side where they sleep until they are healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the spine in the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	In some cases, there is fracture of the neck bones, and slowly they heal, and similarly with the spine in the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when such an occurrence happens to someone and you want to know if they will heal or not, then consider this: if you see their hands already softened and numb and dead, and they cannot move them or stretch them, and when you press on them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle and there is no feeling of pain in them, then you know that they will not heal, and in such conditions it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they move those parts and feel constriction when pressed on them or pierced with a needle, then you know that the bone in the neck is safe and that the patient will recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the neck like this and want to know whether it will heal or not, then consider the condition.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Now if you see that the patient is already softened, and it happens like this in most cases, and suddenly when he lies on his back, windiness and involuntary evacuation occur, and sometimes he is pushed onto his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you will know that it is fatal, and at that point do not labor in his cure.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of those causes occur, the condition is better and more remote from danger.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for him is to apply poultices to reduce the abscess until you place over the protruding vertebra olive oil that has been rubbed, or two eggs mixed and applied; place this on it several times a day until the abscess is reduced.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And now apply one of the comforting and restorative plasters, and bind it on that area; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to lie on the side where pain is felt until he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that the bone is disjointed or for some cause has become separated from it, then you should set it and put the bone in place; and then approximate the two lips of the wound, using sutures if necessary; and then treat it with one of the ointments to promote healing until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the end of the bone is broken at the joint, and it is the end of the shaft, then you should insert your finger into the backside, and align the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible by second intention; and then apply a plaster and bandage to it, if you need them, and bind it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel that stitches are torn in it, then at once remove them, and treat the wound with the treatment that has been described until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the broad area.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the broad areas are easily broken, and if they break, then their fracture is only communication at the ends of those bones and they split along their length and deviate to the sides; and this causes pain in the location and puncture, and movement is impaired when there is a fracture.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you place your hand upon it until it is in the position corresponding to the figure of the fracture.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is at the end of it only, then you must set that according to what seems appropriate to you by equalization until it resembles its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the long part or one that has already deviated to the sides, then you make the patient lie on their back until you are prepared for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have set that, apply a plaster over it, and then place a splint of wood or cane upon it, and bind it tightly with bandages so that there is no fear of puncture of the fracture or movement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And set the concavity with what fills it until that takes the shape according to equality, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If an inflamed abscess occurs after cauterization, then at that moment you must stop the extension of it and its restoration until the cauterized abscess is calmed, and wait with what was previously done; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen it as is fitting.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if you encounter them in the bone or they are crushed, then at that moment you must treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the adjuncts.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjuncts are what lie between the ribs and the shoulder head.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is fractured, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which is that you take a flat splint of moderate thickness according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And let them be attached at both ends with two straps, and then it should be suspended from a high place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And let the patient lie on a mattress; and then place the broken arm over the splint until it reaches the midpoint where the curvature of the splint is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend something heavy on that, or help him extend it to the lower parts; and then the physician should keep the fracture in place with his hands, so that the fracture returns as is necessary.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient lies supine on their neck and suspend the arm at the neck with straps; and then command two assistants, one of whom holds what is above the fracture firmly; and the other holds what is below it; and each extends it in their own direction.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then tie one bandage across the fracture and another perpendicular to it, and each of the two assistants should pull on their respective sides.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the muscle's extremity, then place one half of the bandage over the button (or knot) and the other below the fracture, crossing it.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is close to the joint, then place the bandage over that location and across that joint.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Wrap it with ease and effort, and as soon as it is wrapped as needed and properly applied, then secure it if no abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if an abscess does occur, then loosen the bandaging within seven days, and place over it wool soaked in vinegar and rose water until the abscess subsides, and then secure it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method of securing it is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then wrap a wet cloth around the plaster; and then adjust the arm with the aid of an assistant, and have the hand placed on its respective muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And wrap the cloth and secure around the assistant the arm so that the arm is in a position of stability, unless some cause from the broken bone prohibits it.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And now use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And place on the fracture that splint which is thicker and stronger than the others; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers from both sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And upon this draw lines along the stricture which I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your stricture in the place of the fracture be much narrower.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And the longer the fracture is, the smaller the stricture should be.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And thus when you have positioned the bones and the stricture as we have said, at the moment when you restore the limb to its position, then do it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess, then at that moment leave the stricture and the bones as we have said until the seventh day.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the bandaging in all parts for three days so that no swelling or inflammation occurs in the area; or food should not reach the limb due to excessive tightness of the stricture; and thus correct everything as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are confident that no cause for this will occur, then do not loosen the bandage until after three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient sleep on their back, and their arms be placed on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place a cushion filled with wool under the helper, and at all times of the night or day ensure that the figure of the broken limb is not loose or dissolved, or that the bandaging is too slack; therefore, correct this according to your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And give the patient food according to the order we mentioned before, so that the food is light at first until the bandaging begins; and then it is appropriate to make the diet heavier.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	As to the custom of the assistants and of the dressing of the wound is that they be changed in forty days; and at this time it should be loosened, bath given, and treated with medicines which correct it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is gritty, then you do not loosen the bandage from it for one day or even two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of a fracture of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones which are called the two ulnae; of which one is small and it is that which lies under the little finger, and the other is large and it is that which lies below the small one, towards the lower part.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the greater or lesser ulna is broken alone, or both are broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the lesser ulna above is broken, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is quicker.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the ulna below is broken, the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the lesser ulna above, then it is appropriate for the physician, during its restoration, to allow a slight extension with ease until it is set straight.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the greater ulna is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to allow more vigorous extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both falanges are being cut, then at this hour you must apply the traction more forcefully.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must place the figure of the hand during its restoration and extension spread upon a cushion, with the wrist above all parts, so that all other fingers are in their natural position, and the thumb be lower than the others, and the patient lie reclining on a bed.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And let there be a cushion in front of him at his height or straight ahead, so that the patient does not have to strain.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And let one attendant extend the arm from below toward the patient's hand or bandage, and another attendant extend it similarly from above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And let the physician then guide the bone into place as closely as possible according to its proper alignment.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the process of setting the bone you encounter resistance, then with your skill reduce all parts to their proper place.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears in the resistance a separation that suggests the joint is affected and does not give you hope for its restoration, then proceed with it as we have described above and remove it according to the method mentioned.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is due to plague, I have already treated this in a separate chapter, and therefore follow the treatment described there.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with cerote made from rosin oil and white wax, which is midway between thickness and subtlety, and tightly bind it around so that the abscess subsides; then remove the cerote and apply a plaster prepared from powdered herbs mixed with egg white, and afterward place bandages; let the bandage placed over that fracture be wider and more firmly applied.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of stars on the arm can be seen in major dispositions, whether it is a fracture in one fossa or in two fosse simultaneously.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And appropriately apply pressure to the site of the fracture firmly and vigorously, and when more force is required above or below the fracture, apply the pressure slightly less forcefully according to how it was preceded in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be soft and moistened, not hard or rough, and the bandage with which it is strengthened should be of medium thickness between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and the bandaging after several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, such as swelling that occurs in the limb, you should immerse the limb in hot water until the swelling subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And allow the limb to not be constrained until it rests, and then reapply the bandaging.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the bandaging has already been loosened and the bone is already realigned and appears to be in a similar condition, then correct it with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider carefully if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive bandaging, for then you should loosen it slightly and leave it for several days until nourishment reaches it, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	And if the patient does not experience any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to remove the bandaging for about 20 days or thereabouts.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And so the hand of the patient is suspended by its upper part of motion and agitation, and make him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in xxx days or in xxxii days, or easily restored in xxviii days, and all of this depends on the condition of the tissues and the condition of the bone.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of a fracture of the thumb and of the said bones.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that to the thumb of the hand and to the joints of the said bones, when they are fractured, nothing happens but healing in several weeks.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when a fracture or injury occurs to the hand, it is now necessary for the patient to lie flat and facing upward according to equality, and place the hand upon that extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the minister extends the broken bones and the physician aligns them until they are properly set.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And now it is necessary to apply plaster and cotton, unless an abscess or cauterization occurs; and then place a bandage over it according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the fracture is in the parts inside the palm, and now make it appear as a sphere of cloth, and command the patient to hold that with their fractured palm; then bind it tightly with cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the bandage be made of soft cloth that is raised, so that the palm can apply to the wound; and bind it as needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the parts above, place one splint on top and another under the part in the palm, so that it may be open and straight; and then bind it tightly, as if turning the hand around between the fingers with bandages.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if it happens that there is a fracture in one of the bones of the said fingers, then place the finger as it fits and bind it to the palm, and if you wish, use a small straight splint so that the fracture is elevated and not injured.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in other fingers, such as in the middle finger, index finger, ring finger, or little finger, then align and bind it to its corresponding finger; or bind them all continuously, which is better; or place a small splint over it, as we have said for the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration and afterwards, the disposition of abscesses and opposing conditions — during the operation — as well as what is necessary when any cause of them arises, according to how it is described.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of a fracture of the collarbone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The collarbone, which is often fractured, is evident by touch according to how it has shifted forward and upward.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration is done in such a way that one bandage is tightly wrapped above the fracture and another below it, and the patient lies prone on their belly and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Let the attendant extend the bandage according to its quality when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it extends towards the root of the spine, then the bandage should be applied to the front at the part above the navel, so that its extension stops there, and the other bandage below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the fracture extends towards the navel, then the bandage should be applied above the navel, and its extension should be to the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And the physician should align the bone with both hands and reduce it according to its natural appearance, so that the bone is properly joined; then it is necessary to apply a plaster and bandage, unless an abscess occurs in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if an abscess occurs, then you should leave it alone for several days until the abscess has subsided, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandaging should be done as follows: wrap a firm bandage over the fracture and fold it two or three times, pressing out any excess; then wrap the entire limb so that it goes to the ankle and the root of the spine.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long strip of cloth between the spine and the limb near the navel at the lower parts, and let the ends of the cloth extend from the highest part of both sections, then wrap around the limb and the spine any excess bandage material.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then apply strips of cloth over the spine at the location of the fracture, and place one strip directly over the bone of the limb.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And fill the void between the bowl and the container with soft cloths, so that the constriction may be coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin the binding tightly from above at the site of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you move away from the ligatured area of the fracture, your binding should be looser and lighter and softer.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two ends of the bandage to the sides below until it reaches the nail of the toe, and secure both ends of the bandages on the other side so that the ligature is not moved from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then place the bandage over it in such a way that corrosion, abscess, swelling, or similar conditions do not occur to the limb; and if any of these causes should arise, immediately remove it and correct what has happened as soon as possible, as we have said before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a piece of bone that needs to be placed in the bone, then you should try to set it as best as possible; and if not, cover it and move it, and treat it according to what was mentioned before until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And in some cases, this fracture of the bone is strengthened by binding it with bandages, as we have said regarding the assistant and the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of the limb in such a manner performed, a bad limp should not occur; and if it is restored alone or with the application of another bandage, then it is necessary that the person will have a limp permanently.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the wound heals in forty days or a few months, and all this depends on the diversity of temperaments and other conditions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of a fractured wrist bone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the fracture of the wrist bone often occurs, but twists usually happen more frequently.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if it is a fracture, at that moment it is merely a crack or a bruise in its parts, and this is either one pain or several pains, and all of this depends on the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is such that what is broken in its parts must be equalized, and what is separated must be joined together as much as possible by adjustment, ease, and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply a plaster and place it over that round bandage if you need to use one; and bind it above strictly as is appropriate.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the conditions we have recommended for other fractures, just as in cases of abscess and similar issues, ensure that everything opposes every accident in such a way that it is appropriate for healing.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of a fractured thigh bone.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is thick and is called the femur; the other is slender and is called the fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens with some of the types of fracture that happen to both bones of the arm, and by this restoration is made as with the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation of it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if you break both bones together, the curvature is converted in all directions.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the more delicate bone is broken, the curvature is converted to the forward parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the thicker bone is broken, you will find it below, and it is of those causes that you are not accustomed to.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And immediately administer extension and correction and fixation of the fragments according to that method.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But be careful, if the fracture of the bone is jagged with many edges, that the extension be gentle and slower, and rely on your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And when there is any cause for operation on the arm, and when you align the fragments and complete the entire procedure, now you will take pieces of wood from plants that are rooted below causes that are placed in soil; make them similarly from palm branches; attach these to those with slight grooves, and they should not be of the grasping kind, and their length should be according to the length of the bone, and from the end to the most distant part.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap around each one a cloth in two layers according to the length of it, and place one at the part of the bone on one side and the other on the opposite side, and they should be from the end to the lowest location of the body.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Place the two stakes in three places at both extremities and at the middle place, for with this structure the camber is forbidden to lean towards the right and left, and it stands in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And now a beam of wood is administered according to the length of the arch; and let the arch be placed in such a way that it preserves its freedom of movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And especially do this in the case of a fracture, and when it is properly a case of splinting.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And each day consider the arch and study it based on previous studies, and you must guard it from abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any such cause occurs, then act upon it as is necessary until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the shinbone and of the bones of the foot and of the aforementioned.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	A complete fracture does not usually occur in the shinbone; but fractures can occasionally occur in the bones of the foot; and among those of the foot, few suffer fractures, and they rarely experience anything more than strain due to improper positioning.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot suffer a fracture and those bones are elevated above each other, then the patient should place their foot on prepared ground as mentioned.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then place the foot on what is elevated by those bones, and proceed to press them, and bind them until they return to their proper places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply a plaster and place padding above it, and below the arch of the foot, place a small board with two padded edges.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And so prepare that part of the body which is to be treated, since you have wrapped that limb or parts for the reasons required.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, you then loosen the bandage, and you will find the bones either disjointed, broken, or dislocated, and the treatment for these conditions is as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if anyone says they are broken, then you should set them and join them as I have recommended to you in the setting of the bones of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then prepare the broken finger according to its length, and make it slightly longer; and then place this limb on the table as I have recommended to you, and wrap it with proper tightness.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if what is broken consists of two or three or more bones, then you prepare a splint for each finger made in the quantity wrapped in linen cloth, and tighten the table at the lowest part of the limb, and let it rest on one end of the board away from the abdomen so that the tongue has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you not to forget that you should consider all the causes mentioned to you in other fractures and accidents that we have discussed; and treat each accident with what is appropriate.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the pubic bone in women and of the bone of the penis and the shaft of the penis in men.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the pubic bone of a woman is broken, then perform the surgery in a reclined position, and then tilt her slightly to one side, and let her be supported behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	By the midwife the bladder is filled with cotton, and it is made in the womb just as is hoped; and shortly after the woman is shaken, and she raises the buttocks little by little, for all this is forgotten within until it is before the exit of the womb just as is hoped and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place poultices on his back, and when he wants to urinate, lift the buttocks easily so that he can urinate, and reduce it and return it according to the way you mixed it at the beginning, and then return him to his original poultice.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around that time, for he will be restored then.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take a sheep’s bladder and stretch over its neck a tube of cane; and insert the entire bladder into his wound, and then blow air through the tube vigorously until the bladder is inflated inside the wound, for the fracture will return.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be filled with cotton and kept for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the hip joint in a man or woman is broken, administer what we have recommended for the thigh bone in its restoration and alignment.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures that rarely occur, especially for one who has studied and used this work of mine; for this fracture means to you in the major positions through straightness in its restoration and constriction, and thus you understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the case of a man's fractured penis, take a sheath made of oxhide, and place the penis in it; then wrap it with a cloth covering, and leave it like that for three days or around that time, and it will heal.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of fractured bones when there is swelling.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for him who suffers a fracture with swelling, especially if the bone is large like the femur or the humerus, or similar to these, that you prepare yourself and cut the veins of the limb immediately if the conditions for venesection indicate it, as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the swelling emits blood, then you should be prepared to treat this by preventing its retention in such a way that you powder over it finely triturated substances, unless another cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And immediately begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess occurs, then you should postpone the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, for you will cause worse accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin, then you should reduce it and align it with your fingers as easily and with little extension as possible.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if extension is not prepared for you and the alignment of it with your fingers is difficult, then you should reduce it using this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight digits, and its width according to the size of the swelling. It is necessary for the surgeon to have three or four such instruments in different sizes suitable for various types of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And let it be round, and let there be little grease on it so that it is not doubled over when you press upon it during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And let it have a sharp point at which there is a margin in its extremities; and let the upper part be thick, and from the middle to the ends be tapered.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called in Greek "labrum voluntz atelarem," which means a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the end of it may be placed steady with its tip raised above the end of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And press it in one motion such that the bone returns to its place, and let it be equalized with some adjustment.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And thus strive to equalize the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of the broken bone is fine, and does not take the instrument well, then it is necessary that you incise the end of that bone so that the instrument has better access.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have recommended, then incise it with that which seems appropriate to you among the knives we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And smooth that which remains on the bone of roughness and small ridges.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction the patient experiences severe pain in the tooth, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and thus do what will be of great help to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When you have completed the restoration of the bone that you are performing, and now it is summer, soak a cloth in black styptic wine and apply it properly; do not put cerot or any other substance containing oil on the wound, so that decay and corruption may not occur.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And immediately after administering plates at the time of your completion of the bone restoration, leave the wound uncovered so that you can excise any protrusions with scissors and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be extremely careful not to press the wound on the fracture, for many times inexperienced doctors have done this, causing their patients to suffer death or incurable illness such as gangrene.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the swelling is slight, soft, and different from the swelling of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or it is a bad wound, and you fear some of the harmful accidents we have mentioned, and you feel pain in that area, then do not place plates on it, but make that bandage with hard cloths instead of plates and press it against it.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And after one day or two days, when the wound begins to generate granulation tissue, then you remove the cloth that you had placed on it soaked in wine, and immediately apply bandages, including those we customarily use to treat wounds, such as tetrafarmacon and similar treatments.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is necessary for you to untie the bandage and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and it should be prepared in such a way that decay flows away from it to lower parts with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If after many days the swelling does not consolidate and is not excised from the limb, then you should know that here one must worry about small abscesses which lie hidden within the swelling.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those abscesses, those which are separate and can be extracted and removed, do so. For those that remain within and cause pain when the limb is moved, incise them as far as is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the swelling becomes inflamed or ulcerated, which is a sign of severe corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary to proceed according to one of those methods appropriate for the treatment, as described in the preceding chapter on this subject.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And concerning the matter on which I must speak and you should pay attention: When a bone is fractured, it protrudes from the limb like the bones of the fingers and those of the small limbs, and do not attempt to pull it out or remove it because doing so may lead to death within twenty or thirty days; instead, leave it inside where it has lodged, for it will likely fall back into place on its own in that time. And then treat the swelling if you see fit, but otherwise leave it as is.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of knots that occur as remnants of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Often enough, this knot occurs in the remnants of a fracture during healing, especially near joints, and it hinders the normal function of the limb; and frequently prevents the limb from performing its natural movements.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider whether the knot is recent and administer medicines that have a styptic effect, such as aloes, myrrh, celandine, sercapillo (celandine), and agrimony; take any of these or all of them. Prepare a poultice with one of these styptic substances or albumen from egg whites, or make it more agreeable to the patient, and apply it over the knot using linen bandages, securing it tightly in place.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	There is no extraction that does not loosen the knots with words daily; and then loosen it and apply another, until the swelling subsides; or apply a strip of lead over it, for lead has the property of drawing out all that is inflamed in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the swelling has already become hardened into a stone and it is necessary to remove it urgently, then cut it at its most prominent part, and excise the excess and elevated portion, or grind it down with certain instruments until the swelling subsides; and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of fractures when they are set and subsequently the limb is moved gently not contrary to its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is set, and subsequently the limb is moved gently, this is done for various reasons: among which one reason is too much loosening of the bandages and binding them not as required; or excessive constriction of the bandages preventing nourishment from reaching the limb; or excessive use of poultices; or unnecessary movement at the wrong time; or lack of blood in the patient's body and weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The treatment for this is to give the patient food and make his body soft so that blood is multiplied in him; administer baths; and apply poultices and leeches to him.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then apply a plaster to the limb, so that the plaster draws in nourishment, or continue applying poultices with warm water, until nourishment flows and returns to its natural course.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of broken bones when they have been set improperly and prevent their operation from what is necessary.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens that the already set limb, near its healing from its curvature and prominence of the broken bone and knotting, resembles in form as if the limb were newly broken, yet the limb is not prohibited from its natural use, then there is no need for you to accept the word of one who believes that member to be freshly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But now it stands as a matter of false doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is a shameful one leading to great fear, the sign of which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if limping and knotting are recent, then it is necessary to wrap them in hot water containing soft herbs such as flax seeds, linseed, and melilot, and similar ones; or apply a soft plasters like well-made myrobalan paste mixed with linseed or olive oil, ground with vinegar or sour grape juice, and applied therewith; or take fatty figs and crush them with dove's milk, and similar remedies for consolidating the healing process.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And in some cases, it is dissolved through frequent gentle friction, which should be done with the most moist substances, and the limb's movement should be administered in all directions at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if the curvature has already advanced and has become hard and turned into bone, and it has reached the necessity of treatment with iron, then it is necessary to discharge the pus above it and dissolve the continuation of the bone, and carefully cut what is superfluous from the knotting of that limb with a fine instrument, and facilitate this with care and diligence.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On Speaking of Dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is when any of the joints loses its proper location, thus prohibiting movement, and the figure of the limb is distorted, causing severe pain and great injuries.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	When a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to immediately attempt to reduce it and not delay in doing so, because if it is delayed, swelling will occur, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, one should not move or keep the patient standing during the swelling, because it often causes spasms and severe pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when this happens, you should prepare for the incision of the swollen area, and then allow it to rest until the swelling subsides. After that, bathe the limb with warm water and oil, and then reduce the dislocation gently.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And treat the entire limb with what will help it remember its proper place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And thus I have arranged the chapters on dislocation as they were described for fractures, starting from the upper part of the body and moving to the lower parts.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Lower Jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	When the two jaws are dislocated, they do not delay in treatment; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: either they are moved from their places slightly and made somewhat loose; or they are completely and entirely dislocated until they become loose at the joint where saliva flows from the patient's mouth and they cannot close it, and the tongue of the patient is wrapped in a cloth.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation of the joint is slight, it returns by itself in most cases with little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and severe, it must be reduced urgently, and should not be delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the minister should instruct the patient to place one finger inside the mouth near the dislocated jaw if the dislocation is on one side; or both fingers together if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers should remain outside equally spaced; and order the patient to cease clenching their jaws and open them widely in each direction; and the physician should gently guide the jaw back into place until it returns to its proper position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer inhalation with hot water and oil until the reduction can be performed gently on both sides without delay, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they return and are equally aligned, but the patient's mouth remains closed and not relaxed, then apply plasters made of cloth with wax on them, and make it from beeswax and oil softened; and bind it gently to facilitate movement.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head between two pillows, so that it does not turn to either side; and do not force them to chew for any reason; have their food be cut up finely until pain subsides and the jaws are healed, then they may eat as they wish.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	With this should be administered with ease, and he should not work on the opening of the mouth for eating and drinking and speaking until the jaw is healed and cured.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of both jaws when they are dislocated at any time and have not returned to their places is difficult, fevers and continuous sweats often occur, and the patient's belly is easily distended, and frequently vomiting of pure bile occurs.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then you know that it is lost; and often the one to whom this happens dies within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The collarbone is not dislocated from the chest below by its continuation to the bones; and sometimes it is dislocated outward, and this is apparent by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then press the area with your palm with strong pressure, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then apply a plaster and powders and strengthen that area.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the extremity of that which connects to the neck and is continuous with it is not dislocated on any day; therefore, it must be reduced and bandaged as we have said and as you prepare it.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a plaster, powders, and compression, and instruct the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And this method reduces the swelling when the muscle is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the Reduction of Muscle Dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the upper part to the lower part.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	The second is when it is dislocated above the muscle, and this happens quickly; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	It is more often dislocated and moved out below the titillium, and especially in those whose flesh is thin, it is easily dislocated; but in those with thick flesh, it remains outside with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And it often happens to some men through a blow or fall that the muscle of one side becomes swollen and inflamed, and it is treated as if it were already dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then you should treat that as if it were indeed dislocated, and proceed with its treatment accordingly.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation is known when it is below the titillium; thus, you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal one, as there is a clear difference between them; you find a concavity at the head of the muscle below the titillium by touch, and the affected person cannot move their hand to their ear or make that movement with ease.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, you should place the feet above, and you will immediately recognize this clearly, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation a quick reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the practitioner raises the hand above to the upper parts; and then places gentle pressure below at the joint, raising it forcefully to its proper place, and the practitioner raises the hand, and extends it accordingly; and then places it gently as it returns quickly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return as we have said, and after the initial period when the dislocation occurred, usually several days later, then the patient should be bathed in warm water and administered a lotion to soften and relax it as if for treating rheumatism, using hyssop, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and this should be applied.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be placed on their back with a pillow under the joint, waiting until it is evenly relaxed between tension and restriction; and then the physician places the heel of the patient on a ball, raising the muscle upward vigorously, and pulls the patient's hand so that it is not injured below, and another assistant holds the head of the patient, so that it is not injured below, for it will immediately return to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: have a person present who is taller than the patient, and stand on the side of that limb; place your muscle below the joint of the patient and raise the joint to the upper parts until the patient is suspended in the air, and another assistant pulls the patient's hand from below the navel.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the malady is stubborn, then now it must be done by one who has another cause suspended, for so the weighty one is relieved, because the dislocation returns so quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in this other manner: it is that he be placed in the ground a pole long whose top be round in shape, as if it were a mortar pestle, neither thick nor thin, and nearby be placed beneath the malady; then when so placed upon the top of the pole strong cloths, and the patient stand according to the length of the pole, and then stretch out his hand towards the sides beyond the other part; and extend the body from the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction of him by all the causes we have mentioned is difficult, then use this cure: it is that you take a pole whose length be two arms, and breadth of four fingers, and the thickness of it be adjusted to the size of a thimble according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then above the round top cloths be placed so that the pole does not hurt the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then be placed beneath the armpit of the patient, and stretch out the hand or arm over the pole towards the sides, and cloths be wrapped around the assistant and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then be placed the arm on a rung of a ladder according to its breadth, and the hand be stretched out towards the sides, and the other body be suspended from the other side, for the joint returns quickly.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument of it is completed according to each manner that is possible to you, then place beneath the armpit a pad of wool of equal quantity; and then place an adhesive plaster prepared with powder of oak bark and egg white over all the muscle, as was mentioned above, and then bind strictly from the armpit; and the bandage be wound around the plaster, and the hand of him be attached to his neck, and leave it, and do not disturb the hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	Let the food of the sick person be moderate until the limb is strengthened, for it is easier to achieve recovery thus.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And let the food be given more around seven or five times, and then let one exercise some movement; and thus if it is firm and not softened, now it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to repeated exposure to moisture that occurs to it or for some other reason, then it is necessary to administer cautery three times, as was stated before in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not stable, and the plaster and strapping are reapplied several times, but it remains unstable, and the patient cannot raise that arm above certain points, then you know that the nerves of it, which attach at the head of the muscle, have been severed or stretched or softened, and understand that the joint will never be fixed in its proper place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Regarding the dislocation that occurs from the feet and the heel or the rear parts, the reduction is done with impulse and extension mostly, until it returns to its place.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And let the other strapping be administered to it, and care for it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if during the healing process there is heaviness in the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient should use baths several times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the collarbone.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the collarbone is dislocated with difficulty and seemingly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, but more so towards the front than behind. And the dislocation of it is not hidden from you as it appears below the view or touch according to whatever figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated collarbone, that is clearly declared to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor touch its muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And you should treat it, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it becomes an abscess due to cautery, for if it reaches that stage, the reduction of it is difficult, and it rarely heals completely; especially when it is in the rear parts, for it is worse than all other types of dislocations, more painful, and many people die from it.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand should be extended across two hands, and the arm should be expanded, and the physician's hand should be on the collarbone below it, and he should push the joint with his fingers together or with the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns as he bends his hand with his other hand, until he strikes the collarbone with the palm of his hand.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer vigorous extension and strong force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two assistants should extend the arm, and hold it firmly by both ends so that it is not moved due to the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	After you have thoroughly wrapped the arm, since it is covered with a long doubled cloth around the hand or with bandages.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the surgeon touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that this aids in the lubrication of the joint and facilitates its movement; then forcefully push the joint until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And after the reduction of the shoulder, it should rest on a support that is firm and secure on a wooden board, and it should be bound with moderate compression, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and left like this for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it should be loosened; and if the joint is formed in its proper place, now you loosen the bandage of it and leave it like that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not properly set, then you should reapply the plaster and bandages, and leave it like this for several days until it is secured; and then loosen it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if you encounter severe pain during the reduction of the joint and the patient is in motion, then administer hydration with baths and gentle friction, and compression until it is relieved; or have the patient pause and rest the joint, as movement exacerbates the condition; and then bandage it, and leave it like this day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then lift that and place it in a bath; and when dry, you should rub the joint with moderate friction, and then reapply rest to it, as movement worsens the condition, once, and the second time, and the third time.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Take an instrument for bathing, ensure that it is clean.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, place a pad over that moist and irritated fissure at the border and bind it there; do this for several applications, as this is moist and reduces to its proper condition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation of the wrist, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Dislocation of the hand sometimes occurs, and the reduction of this dislocation is relatively easy compared to other joints; however, it is important that there be speed in reducing it when it happens, before swelling occurs or an abscess forms.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of this dislocation is done by placing the joint of the injured hand on a table and having an assistant extend the hand. The physician then places his own hand or palm over the vicinity of the joint and presses it until it returns to its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it must be considered whether the palm is already displaced towards the back of the hand. If that is the case, the injured person should place the two sides of their hand on a table during extension and reduction; if the dislocation is towards the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be placed flat on the table so that the physician's hand can press directly over the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns to its place immediately, that is good; but if not, then bind it with a bandage to allow for swelling and leave it like that; do not repeat this procedure, as doing so could cause pain or hinder the reduction over the days that follow.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint remains rigid according to its curvature; and do not inform the patient of any reason, except that the hand is softened and cannot grasp any cause; now you know that the nerves are severed or divided, and now there is no remedy in it but that it be strengthened with cauterization proper for the case and thus confer some relief.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Then when the dressing is removed, now pause on the bandage which we have recommended, and let it be left to rest for five days; then afterwards it should be loosened and allowed to remain loose, while the hand is exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	However, if the movement of it remains and you encounter any gravity in it, now treat that with hot water and friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of the displacement of the said joints.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Several times dislocate the said joints completely.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a finger of those is dislocated towards the palm or towards the base, now press the finger and urge the dislocation with your thumbs, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then hold the tip of the finger and suspend it above the part to which it is dislocated, and let it remain like that for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and extend it until it is properly bandaged on that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, wrap it as described, and do not stop loosening it during the day and exercising with movement, and wrap it at night; and do this for several days until it is strong.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	If it seems apparent that this is a dislocation at the elbow joint, bind it in such a way and perform with this the first operation until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do this when it is dislocated at other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs to any of the vertebrae of the back or neck and they move out of their places, there is then no cure, for death is feared for the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	The sign of this is that the movement of the patient's body occurs without their will, and they cannot control it; often some parts of them move, such as both legs or arms, or one of them; or a vertebra is out of its place, for sometimes it moves and sometimes it returns to four directions.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	When it is displaced to the rear parts, it is called kyphosis.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	However, the treatment for this is to determine whether the kyphosis is due to weakness, because then there is no cure and it cannot be fully healed.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	However, in the case where it is caused by falling or impact or something similar to these, the Ancients described methods of treatment at length in their discourse, from which I have condensed what is most relevant; for what little I omit is excused by my closeness to understanding and exposition, with which I have made this clear and formed it from various sources different from those used to demonstrate that and explain this.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it is said that in gynecological surgeries involving the division in front of the legs, there is neither birth nor healing from that; and similarly with those made on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And those are not cured except for the one that occurs specifically as I mention with this water.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient lie extended on his face upon a bed equal to the wall, and be laid down below the bedding moistened so that the feet of the patient are not lifted.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And near a straight post should be placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the bed around the head of the patient, and another post on the other side by the feet at the other end of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister hold the post, and it should not be fixed in a hole; and another minister hold the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And nearby wrap around the head of the patient and below the shoulders tie a firm bandage; and extend the end of the bandage to the post which is behind the head, and attach that to it; and then stretch the other bandage over the hips of the patient with his knees, and pull up the thighs; and then adjust all the bandages and attach them to the other post which is behind the feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the minister should extend the bandage to the part of the post, and do not move the two posts and the bandages from their places in which they are fixed, but rather ensure they are not too tight as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the physician should place his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or place upon that a table, and then adjust the patient's feet on the table until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If this method does not return the desired result, take a table whose width or length is about three cubits and dig in the wall near the patient a place where the end of the table can fit.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Then place the middle of the table on the spine, and the physician places his feet on the other end, and he should gently press until the spine is compressed and returns to its proper position.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, open again the one that is wrapped around the hand; and this is how you place the patient's head between the ends of two poles, the length of which should be one arm, and behind his head another pair of poles in the same way; and the distance between each pole should be a palm, and there should be grooves cut into each pole through which they are firmly attached to the ground so that they do not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be a round pole in which is the wrap, and it should be wrapped around the two grooves of the two poles.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a groove in which the pole is fitted, its length being one palm where it is wrapped; and on the other two poles there is something similar.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then pull the ropes that you have tied to the patient's feet in the groove behind his head, and the ropes that you have tied to his shoulders in the wrap behind his legs.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	Then behind each wrap should be a minister who turns the wrap with his hand, and the physician should adjust the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the spindle:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the spine is returned to its place and the area is leveled, it is now necessary to apply an astringent poultice with egg white, and then wool; and afterwards place over the poultice a stick of wood whose width is three fingers or thereabouts, and whose length should be proportional to the extent of the swelling, and on both sides of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then bind it with the bandage we have mentioned, and use subtle nourishment until he is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any hardness remains in the area at the end of the healing process, it is now necessary to administer medicines that soften and smooth the affected area over a long period with the board we have recommended; and a lead plate should also be applied to that location.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And at times hardness occurs in the back of the lower spine due to dislocation; and that bone is one where it is dangerous to use this medicine, for it could easily lead to death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the muscle attachment are subject only to dislocation, and do not suffer what happens to other joints with small movement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip can be dislocated in four ways, either inward, outward, forward, or backward.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is mainly displaced towards the interior parts, and sometimes towards the anterior or posterior parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The sign of the dislocation towards the interior parts is that when you adjust the thigh of the injured person next to the uninjured one, it is longer and the kneecap is more prominent than on the healthy side, and the injured person cannot bend their leg past a certain point, as this place where bending occurs is affected by swelling or cautery due to inflammation. Therefore, the head of the joint has already reached here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of the one to whom dislocation occurs towards the exterior is that the symptoms are opposite to those mentioned in this case.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of the one to whom dislocation occurs towards the anterior parts is that the thigh can be raised somewhat but cannot be bent without causing pain in the knee, and if they attempt to move, they cannot do so forward; and their urine is retained, and their swallowing is affected by swelling, and they must walk on their heel.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of the one to whom dislocation occurs towards the posterior parts is that they cannot raise the knee, nor can they bend it before bending the elbow, and the thigh is shorter than the other side, and the joint is softened, and the head of the joint is in that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	However, the reduction of the various types of this dislocation is that you consider whether the dislocation is old and chronic. If it has been long-standing, you should then administer reduction according to its disposition, but at that time complete cure cannot be expected; therefore, no promise should be made regarding full recovery.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In the case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four types of dislocation, proceed to rotate the joint and extend it towards both sides within and without, and move it to the right and left, for it easily returns, and no other treatment is needed.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong support and extend the limb from below towards the back, or along its sides, or use a bandage placed above the joint; another person should hold the hand of that limb from above in such a way as to place their hands behind the joints; and immediately apply a lion's bandage tightly over the injured area, with another person holding the extremity of the bandage.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And this extension of the limb or of the inner part towards the angle of the shoulder, or of the rear part towards the back.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And perform this extension of all those parts at once while the patient is raised off the ground and kept suspended.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is common to all four types.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And thus if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and if not, then for every type it is necessary to proceed with what I will describe regarding its specific treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the joint when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is towards the inner parts, have the patient lie supine on their back; then place the bandages over the injured area at the point where the head of the joint and the location behind the angle meet; and then extend the bandage from above the part of the armpit to the farthest part of the shoulder blade.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Let another strong minister take his arms, and firmly grasp the swollen part of the diseased joint and extend it outward forcefully, for that returns to its proper place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this method is the quickest for curing the one to which this member is reduced compared to the other methods.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if it swells on you and does not obey the treatment with this method of cure entirely, then now it is necessary to bind both sides of the injured area tightly with a strong, quick bandage over both heels and both toes.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each be four fingers in quantity, and let the diseased side be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And let the diseased one be suspended above the top of the post, and hold him by his hand; and let the distance from him to the ground be two arms' lengths.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong youth to pull on the head of the joint, and let another youth suspend the diseased one, while the other youth pulls the joint with great force, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the proper reduction, when it is dislocated to the outward part, let the diseased one lie on his back as we have recommended for lying down; and bind the bandage tightly around the injured side and over his feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then place two posts, one at his feet and the other at his head; and then place adjusted posts on each side of the shoulder laid upon which are wrapped wet cloths, so that the diseased one is not harmed by the post being between his arms, to prevent the extension downward from being pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each minister extends to his part, and the surgeon with his skill completes the reduction according to art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you obey the reversal, it will be very beneficial; and otherwise, place it carefully as we have said about jaundice for that treatment.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But it is necessary that the patient lie on his back quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is to the front parts, then it is necessary that the patient be extended quickly, and according to this narration, he should lie on his back; and the surgeon places the palm of his right hand on the affected area, and with this compression, he extends it from the lower part towards the front.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is to the rear parts, then it is not necessary that the patient be extended to the lower part, and he should be raised off the ground; however, it is necessary that he lie on a hard surface, just as it is necessary for him similarly if the shoulder joint is dislocated outward, according to what we have said about the positioning of the shoulder on two boards; and he lies on his face with the limbs extended, as we have said, there is no cure.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it is necessary to administer compression on the table at the location of the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, when the reduction is complete as it should be — and the sign of the shoulder reduction is not hidden from you, which is that you extend both arms of the patient, and when you see them equal and the patient extends his arm and expands it naturally without difficulty, then you know that the limb has returned as it should — and now you adjust two things and apply a bandage so that the shoulder is not injured in any part; and adhere to the patient resting for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then undo the bandage and the dressing, and compare one side with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Now, if you see those marks on the skin, now you know that the dislocation has been fixed, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of inflammation, now you return and dress that area, and gently stretch it according to your initial structure, and let it be for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then undo that [binding], and have the patient delay in walking on each [affected area] for several days until it is strengthened.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the joint.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The joint can be dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated towards the outer parts, towards the inner parts, and towards the lower parts more than towards the rear; but it does not dislocate towards the front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of a dislocation is that you command the patient to apply their hand to the chest; now you know that the joint is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all types of dislocation is that you command the patient to straighten it, so that they can extend their hand as much as possible; place your thumbs against the side of it, and put your feet between their feet; then press the joint with both your palms, and hold them firmly around the joint with strength, while another assistant extends their foot so that the joint returns to its proper place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of recovery for him is that his belly adheres to his ribs without laboriousness.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply a plaster to that and make the belly adhere to the ribs, and then tie those bandages with a cloth for three days or four, and then untie them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the method of walking for several days until he is healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of him to you is unnecessary, now administer a strong extension with bandages as described in the preceding narrative about the treatment of the hip.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of dislocation of the thigh.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The thigh is sometimes displaced by a slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated completely; the dislocation of it is done either towards the interior parts or towards the exterior parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of it is that you see the thigh swollen towards the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the treatment of its displacement is easy recovery, and it should be extended with ease and equality until it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the treatment of it when it is completely dislocated, you must perform the procedure correctly, and let him have a strong and capable assistant behind him at the middle location of it.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then place your right hand on the uppermost part of the thigh, and your left hand below the knee at the location of the joint.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Take the leg and straighten it towards your right side, then pull it with both hands towards your left side, and extend it to the left; and press down with your feet on the leg towards your right side as you work.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	Do this twice as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Then press down with your feet on the leg for the third time while you are at the nail.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Then return it in one attempt or two according to this method, and if you find the leg equalized, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation immediately as it returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if it is forbidden for you to reduce the leg as we have recommended, then lay the patient on their back on the ground, and fix a board firmly on the ground under the injured part, and place it between the bones, and wrap the area in cloth so that you do not displace the injury.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Then have one assistant hold the patient's limbs, and another assistant extend the leg with his hands or with bandages around the ankle; and then each assistant should pull against the extension on their side, and the board should be placed between the bones of the injury holding it in place so that the body is not pulled away from the area during the extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Then the physician should realign the dislocation with his hands, and another assistant hold the healthy limb on the opposite side, as the dislocation will return to its place with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and you are sure of the successful reduction, now apply a plaster and firmly bandage it with strong bandages, and bind the leg to the board with bandages.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	Be careful and guard against the nerves which are behind on the heel, so that the ligature upon them is not violent and weakens them greatly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And apply that for two days or three; and if the ligature has softened, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And untie that on the third day or on the fourth, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary for them to move before that time, there is no guarantee that the displacement will not dissolve and corrupt, and therefore it will not be receptive to treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if it happens that the abscess needs to be cauterized, you should then administer according to the guidance of the liquid in which our narration proceeds, in another place for treatment and application until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the said foot bones.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Ensure that the one who is dislocated rests with some extension without work; and what is not difficult is easily accomplished.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in some joints of the two feet, then you should have the patient lie on a flat surface on the ground or on a table, and let them be positioned as if they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand on one foot, and place your foot on the area that needs to be reduced, and then step on it firmly until it returns to its proper position, so that it appears level and no longer protrudes.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	After the pause, place the foot on a board that will support the entire foot, which has two ends, and then strengthen it with a proper and firm structure for three days; then loosen that and allow it to rest from walking for ten days, until it is strengthened and its improvement is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	About the types of dislocation that are caused by injury, fracture, or any such circumstances.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When one of those causes occurs, and you fail in the treatment of it and in its restoration, many times death results.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And because of this, one should not presume to treat it unless they are wise in the art, experienced over long use, merciful and compassionate, neither hasty nor presumptuous; and at the beginning, let them use medicines that only reduce swellings, and leave the patient's fate to divine judgment, but seek help from someone to whom you hope for salvation from destruction, or relief from illness, in whom there appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then strive to perform the reduction for them as soon as possible at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes a swollen abscess.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the limb returns as we want it to, immediately administer a regimen that reduces swelling and treats the injury with what is appropriate from the available dry remedies.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is with a fracture and occurs in the separated bones, then you must treat the condition as we have said for simple injuries, dealing with it as has been described for such places.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear as it has been preceded by my preaching; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and most wholesome for your true body you will see these in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Albucasis perfectly, for which God be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
