Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	And now they begin speaking with Albuccas (Albucasis is a medieval medical text attributed to Guy de Chauliac, an influential surgeon of
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	And now you have completed this book of medicine which is at the end of scientific knowledge for me, due to your understanding as conveyed through lectures and statements from you, showing that you comprehend fully this treatise on surgery I've dedicated myself to studying.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	When the operation is restrained in our region and at all times, until I am restored by its science; but only some small descriptions are found freely among ancient texts, which I change to correct these errors and clarify intentions—thus limiting my knowledge to what'dicted herein.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And I have seen that you understand this tractate in accordance with its second part of exposure and declaration, as well as for the addition of cauterizing tools and other instruments needed for the work at hand; which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	May be the reason why no one dares to use a tool on their own body in our times, for medicine has become long and complicated, requiring extensive knowledge of anatomy as Guiliel knows about the proper parts and forms of these bodies; including bones, nerves, muscles (lacertz), names of those things, and spaces within them where blood circulates actively or rests quietly.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	Through Aqua Ypocrates' guidance which is also the name of this work, mainly in matters concerning health (or medicine).
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	May we already have discussed this matter in the entrance of our free time; who does not know what we've told them about anatomy, will fall into error and become dead if they see only parts of these things, which are formed within this science and taken from its knowledge and experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Here is the line-by extran language to English translation:
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	Here comes another doctor who prescribes drinking the juice of one such grain that had processed in his state; and the seed was large, came to him, and he extracted it using a tool from the bladder, so that this home would die by the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you have called her out of the way for it, and because of the great size of the stone and the disposition of the uterus to come undernethy that she should die therein.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And another doctor takes pay from our land' extradition lord and gets a black instrument which was fractured in his thigh; he proceeds with it without knowledge, breaking the fragment on ground or pillows and lungs, not allowing respiration.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	Return the detachment according to your wishes, and restore its position, commanding us on certain days and times when we are allowed to loosen it; thereafter enters into rupture in the buttocks or between thighs of the patient.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you have called upon him/her (a healer), and equipped with the ligature, to achieve calmness and relief from their pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	Even though corruption had been confirmed in the limb, so that it could not be restrained, and prevented from spreading within while under the influence of humidity (malaute).
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And here comes another doctor who pierces an abscess and it ruptures within days; until the wickedness of him reaches his Lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the brain fever (possibly referring to melancholia or encephalitis) affects it completely, not just any part of him but specifically the limb where he suffers from this condition overall.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for that reason, it is necessary for you to devise the operation in two sections: one associated with health and another where there is risk involved.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	So take up your weapons in solicitude and for the protection of God, and use them against diseases to ensure health and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	Here comes the translation line by line into English:
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	When gout appears in some of its manifestations:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Not a doctor can handle illness poorly, for doctors themselves are not named.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have already entered this book for the second time through these three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Commencing the division of the free space, starting from the primary section divided initially.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The ordered first chapter within the foot'thy parts, concerning their forms and instruments of caustic, what is needed for its application in treatment.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	La division of the second partition.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The Second Chapter on probing and puncturing, and of purgatives, and poisons extracted for those purposes, has been completed and arranged according to the forms of instruments used therein.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the pure partition.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third part for restoration and loosening of the body' extruded parts (hips), head within the weight upon one’s shoulders – orders these forms as needed: capitol arranged from top to bottom on oneself during heavy load, using instruments accordingly.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	From cautery (and) medicine acute care and memory of painfulness;
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	At that point begins the treatment of all free parts.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	When you determine the quality of that cauterization and where it is forbidden to use such treatment,
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	So say that the discourse of cautery and its obscurity is long and elaborate, using subtlety in science; they speak much about it extensively, disagreeing among themselves, and for me just a part suffices due to prolonged discussion.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And so it is said that the cautery comforts all of the body universally, except for two complexes which are parts of its matter. (The term "cauteries" refers to instruments used by medieval physicians for various treatments such as setting bones or stopping bleeding. The text implies a holistic approach in treating pain and injuries where cautery is applied broadly across the body, with exceptions made only for two specific complexes—likely referring to areas that are not directly affected
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the dried and humid parts of matter (likely referring to body tissues), we separate them; those who find relief apply their instruments there, while others go against it because such treatment is not appropriate for illnesses characterized by both moisture and dryness—since these are qualities inherent in fire's nature. Thus, the necessity arises that dampened (humid) and seared (dried with heat from a cautery or similar means of application) parts be healed; this is necessary because they represent both moisture and dryness—qualities innate to water itself which makes such illnesses inconvenient.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	Here comes the sentence for translation: "Discover that which speaks against it, which through cautery is greatly beneficial in all dry madness tail and body pains where men experience them when comparing a man' extrinsic humors with those of himself at the focus point.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	Through that speech of his, I have already experienced some waters coming to me.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	Even if there is a need to withdraw the cautery that has already been applied and exercised in the chest area for today' extrication of what was previously exposed by means of cutting tools (cauterization), taking into account the complexity of human composition and the disposition of diseases within them, as well as their causes and accidents; moreover, consider also the time span that these conditions have persisted.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	When in other complexities, it is not out of fear but mainly due to damp and cold humors, all doctors are agreed upon treating these issues with caution during the procedure involving such instruments (cauterization).
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	May the medicine' extricate reach that individual in their limb where it has lodged, and forcefully draw out into the diseased member difficult to heal and swiftly withdraw.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	May the focus (medical attention), through its sublimity and substance of goodness, does not excessively consume resources; for we have come to know it thanks to experiments and long periods of servitude in studying this art concerning truth about causes; thus excusing us from lengthy discourse. At this pause within our conversation, I shall share with you the secret manipulation at the focus (the specific medical intervention), whose quality is demonstrated through surgical procedures on limbs and expulsion methods for diseases—all of which are philosophically proven arguments presented herein to enlighten your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And wise ones know that it is best at which time one should perform cauterizations and rest periods in the early morning of first day.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	So do not press on your feet or hips, for they are only valued by the common people and ignorant physicians; as a result, curing this illness through cauterization cannot be completed at once, causing delay in treatment.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	The cause is not due to the absence of water where our bodies draw it from, but rather curative tools used in medicine that alter complexity and evaporate moisture which are causes for pain coming forth.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Even though there may be unnecessary cautery on top of the medicine, due to the patient'se urgency and magnitude of their operation, our lord requires it.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	Here is the line-by extralined translation:
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	Even though it is vulgar speech that sharp tools are used in medicine and this language itself cannot understand the depths of healing knowledge, for which I do not apply myself or others as treatments within medical practice nor to other causes with these instruments.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And now that you have prepared (cauterized) the lower extremities of medicine as per your understanding, according to which I understand for most parts and sometimes also among doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And if gold-edged razors are better than iron ones for making cuts or cauterizations, they were not used except for equality and elevation of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	Through which we must apply iron hooks and place them properly for the operation' extraneous matter (translation may vary due to ambiguity or lack of context in original text). It appears that this sentence discusses some surgical procedure, involving applying metal instruments - likely cauterizing tools given historical medical practices. However, without additional clarification on specific
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And they have arranged this chapter on the use of hooks (likely for surgical procedures), and those within it are placed in the feet sections to ensure that when someone requests water from them, which likely refers metaphorically here as an aid or necessity during treatment with cautery. This sentence suggests a systematic approach where specific tools like iron hooks have designated places—in this case, associated primarily with foot treatments perhaps for conditions related to circulation or pain relief in
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Regarding the use of these instruments (hooks) intended as a remedy against joint pain caused by cold and moisture imbalance within the body. Here, iron hooks might be
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter or primary source discussing this aspect likely outlines found
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This first chapter is concerned with cauterization addressing humidity and coldness as the causes of a sudden disorder arising from excess room airflow (possibly referring to poor circulation or respiratory issues), which requires attention not only at head level but also in body parts such as shoulders, elbows, arms. Continuous sleeping exacerbates these conditions along with dental and gallblad0
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: initially command the malady to be expelled through medicine-cleansing actions for three or four nights, according to what exhorts the nature of the malady and its age and habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	Return your wrist pressure above your nose between your nostrthy's folds, and place your foot on top of it there:
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	Even so that the heat has reached this place from above as indicated by its signs, apply fire to the pointed cautery of which this is the form.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	Return that above the place as if testing tightness, which is when tendons are contracted down to small sizes, and you turn it around there.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Return your hand to the location and observe it there, if you have already discovered some quantity of bone from the skull, take that amount with as much iron dregs (impurities) as lead, raise your hand again towards that place; but if not returnable by any metal herein provided for such use, enter where is indicated on the bone which doctor has shown you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	Return (put back) a small amount of salt and dissolve that over the place, letting it act for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Return your hand over his body part where it was started, and place that above there which has been broken by the focus's shield.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	When caring for the area where there is four-drug medication inside until it heals,
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And when a child is born and sucks on their fingers (or bracelet), it becomes better and more pleasurable for them.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And those who are bound in their throat within the bone, and have had chasms sealed inside where any piece of its cavity has been hardened.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Return its bone if it is weakened from the bone and attend to its cure.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	Here come others to carry the hot iron after it has entered and before it enters deep into the strong bone, this is how small phlebotomy (bleeding for medicinal purposes) should be done.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	E from that place exhales the breath of the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	When the patient has been out for long and needs healing within until it is solidified.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	May I not see these various kinds of cautery for all, but only in skilled homes following a specific method; and such it is better that I have you as my healer when the head (of the malady) rises up due to continual rest like we've witnessed in other members, especially when from the abdomen (the region of origin for this condition).
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And if it is possible that this initial type of cautery may save and be more beneficial than others, then from that heat they will heal the work (the injury).
Capitol segon.	Capital Second.
Del cauteri del cap.	From the pointed cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in total the head experiences chronic and long-lasting pain, which is prolonged in the spleen, using spears and cups and cappuglios (head poultices) and liniments and ointments and galls and vinegar and similes, mainly if it has already been cauterized with a tool that does not further explore any of these causes; moreover, consider that the spleen head is made of strong calcification in its nature. It doesn't hurt much nor greatly weaken muscle tissue; therefore, perform another cautery quickly on this joint.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Return that over his head for cauterization inside while the intestine is divided (presumably during surgery or treatment).
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the neck and reveal the bone quantity that we have recorded and cauterize it in the back part of the head where it is being called upon to act, which is also the place where a bellows-like device (ventoscope) has been placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And raise your hand forcefully, and do not discover the bones, for when the humidity contracts greatly it causes a great pain different from pains treated by other cautions of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	Here is the line by line translation of each sentence:
Capitol ters.	Capital termini or end of discussion/treatment phase.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	And for treating inflammation that is ancient and not to be ignored, prepare the instrument for cauterization (to stop bleeding or seal wounds
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When the head or joint pain becomes severe in a game of chess (or any activity), and when this deep aching occurs inside one's bones/joints, it is time for doctors who specialize in internal medicine to come into play; they will prescribe an immediate cure as stated in their texts on diseases. Moreover, without proper treatment which includes both urgent intervention with medication or surgical procedures (depicted here by the knight and rooks), nothing else can be done—cauterization is performed using two methods: either a swift curative medicine for acute conditions involving combustion-like inflammations, or through the use of iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May hot cupping tools of medicine burn and you grasp that object with one hand and separate the limbs of the patient on both sides from it.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And impinge upon the location of pain in one' extramammary surgical site where a lance is hidden within that locality for cutting tendon or ligament.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Return that which is within in wax for healing purposes.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	If you come, take some of these burning remedies that you have written about in the book on hot medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the use of iron for cautery, according to this method:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and they call it a hernial swelling because the head of the body is bent like a bouquet and appears prominent in the place where it lies down (on the body).
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Return the pressure over the location of pain, and hold your hand—so that the iron needle does not get stuck where it has been used just now—and turn the small spike gradually by speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	If the amount of blood that has been collected through the anal examination reaches a point where your hand prevents the artery from being crushed (so it does not bleed), then this ensures there is no outflow of phlegm, which indicates fluid accumulation in the body.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Return the wound to water infused with salt and place it there for three days; then rest the wound on the edge of the bed, applying care so that it heals inside where it is located.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you go ahead, perform cauterization on the part of the lancet according to cauterizations, and be careful not to make an incision in this circulating vessel directly without ancient practice.
Capitol quart.	Capitol Quart (likely referring to one of four sections
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	For ablation by ancient antidote - This translation interprets "Captio" as a Latin term that might pertain to arrest or detention, possibly
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat an ancient antidote for wounds and divisions of diseases, do not neglect the treatment prescribed by medicine or cauterization at the focus point; apply it within that long line wherein lies its mark—the place of pain we are discussing here. Place your hand firmly upon this area to ensure you reach deep into the injury site via puncture marks created with a needle, guiding healing fluids back up through these entry points using fingers pressed against them during application for an extended period within strikes made by arcing implements (possibly referring metaphorically or conceptually rather than utilizing actual tools).
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the protruded jaw, which must be used in chewing, and that the gums not become inflamed or the nerves affected by this condition, so as not to induce spasms.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	If it is about the guardianship and caution of blood flow from where it originates, in that place there is fear, mostly towards those who know not what causes this fluid to emerge uncontrolledly and without study; thus perform operations on him with care.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And when the time for recalling the battle'dictions of the army according to our rule comes here in this place.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	If the illness does not supply this cautery and if it becomes unbearable from within the malady'dictating headache place your instrument in its rightful spot on the top of one’s skull, as we have recounted herein; attend to heal what is inside.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	If you go, administer the one we mentioned earlier in healing with a lancet made of hot iron for two bandages, and this is considered better treatment as well.
Capitol .v.	Capital Case (capitulo) - This indicates that what follows
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Cauterization of the joint pains in the ears: Doctors would use heat or chemicals to burn and seal off affected tissue as treatment for pain
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear there is pain due to cholester0r (implying a buildup of thickened fluid), and it's treated for its causes—the blockages or other underlying conditions mentioned earlier—and this treatment does not remove the cause, then cauterization by fire (or heated instruments) is employed. This described intervention herein forms:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Long enough are you with the cautery of the artery on your finger, where already it has tried to reach its place.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	If all points on the entire body are treated with heat and care is given for places that have healed, it means:
Capitol .vi.	Given that this medieval medical treatise uses archaic language with
De cauterizacio de turtura.	The line "Cauteriziade turturie" in English would likely refer to the treatment or process of
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The translation for "Cauteriziade turturie" might be:  
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid using a pointed cautery that is needed for dryness or due to nervous spasm.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that specific type of torture and purgation, without causing discomfort in your treatment, make sure to use these three cauterisms for the ulcer: take a golden needle (a silver lancet), apply small touches with its tip on the statue (the second one should be tiny increments using the tongue depressor of yours), and employ lip compression jointly.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	When you take back the pointed cautery for the contrary parts of the sick area, only then does it relieve pain in the healthy part that appears.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is how the cautery should be used, and it belongs specifically to barbers, which we are now presenting.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	Mayhaps this subtle one that has scarcely come up, and there is in it an excess of unnecessary flesh a few.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Return care to where it currently flows that is proceeding inside so that it may heal there.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol .vii.: (The text following this line is not provided
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Cauterization of ancient apoplexy." - This translates to the practice of using heat or a caustic substance for medical
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and the remedies we have mentioned do not confer you with your physician or midwife (who no longer has a fever), then perform these four types of caustic treatments: over all head hairs, on the forehead area where poultices are usually applied; similar to what was said earlier in our discussion—applied there as well if necessary; and also apply them around or inside (the chest).
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The action of the cautery is considered as per your indication/statement mentioned earlier.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach, and that may happen again; now is its healing taking place with the water flowing through you are processing.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.: (The text following this reference is not provided
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Cauterization of joint pain caused by frostbite:
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	When given in excess during a meal and large pills are served, these things aid the malady related to the humors within the belly (the metaphorical term 'malady' refers here likely to digestive issues or an imbalance of bodily fluids).
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Return their head entirely from the hump and place your hand on top of it, where the cradle or brace as described in the treatise for supports is placed.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	After some time has passed, that is when it becomes necessary for cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	E when that liquid flows down from above as already mentioned by him.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if for these treatments he is well; but otherwise, make three cauterizations in the back portion of his head, which are from the posterior division of the head down to where the neck begins.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And there is space between each cautery of this wound, and take care that the fluid coming out has been properly attended to.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you wish and the humors are tolerable in your body, then apply cautery to the warm location on the skin; if however, there is a greater accumulation of humors, then perform cautery over both bumps (corns).
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Apply that which is within it has been healed, and use those cauldrons as they have been provided by the giver.
Capitol .ix.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide enough context or
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	For the treatment of worms and softening of all parts of the body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When you process in purification of the head and cleanse what we have said; and apply pressure to the back of the skull, applying a cautery at its spot on the head where there are corns, as well as over the lower part of it, and three cauterisms for the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	If necessary in the condition of softening of the joints during gout and if these pains are severe or intractable, then apply four times hot cautery to the vertebrae of the back, and insert it between the neck bone'dictum till relief is found from pain.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Return that which has been healed within it, and this is olive wax for cauterization.
Capitol .x.	Capitol .x.: This line appears incomplete or possibly out of
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	The phrase "de cauterizzazione dell'epilessia" in English would translate to "cauterization for se
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	 The sentence you provided seems incomplete, but it appears that the context is discussing reasons why a patient with epilepsy might not undergo cautery (a treatment method historically used to burn and seal wounds). Here's an attempt at transl
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	 The sentence appears in French and translates into English as: "So that we can clarify the brain during lunacy (suggesting a lack of understanding or miscommunication about epilepsy) and because other remedies dictated by division when fluid pressure is high and excludes exception, implying treatments specific to severe cases.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	If it is an infant who does not suffer from medicines, administer gout and massage ointments to them through feeding for several days with good nourishments.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Return the head of the malady and apply that particular caustic where pain is felt on the head according to previous indications; also use another caustic at the back of their skull, applying it over each part of the head as was previously indicated:
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	If the humors are strong and enduring, then apply those same caustics to them so that there may be a numbness and softening of the body upon the vertebrae of the neck and those of the back respectively.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And if it is necessary for a second time of use (or application) with an olive wick or instrument that was previously mentioned, then...
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	May it be that if the malady is in the belly (abdomen), then apply delicate caution according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Capitolo XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of melancholia treatment (note that "melancholia" here refers historically to what we now understand as clinical de
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are rotten and heavy humors inside us, they then need to be treated with these cauteries that we have in our homes for paralysis.  
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	If the cause of melancholy is excessively declining and the limbs are cold due to phlegma (representing an accumulation or imbalance in bodily humors), then drink what purifies the brain after that which was consumed during division, as per physicians' guidance.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Return their head under the humors (body fluids), and place it down gently on top of them as if carrying a cushion, ensuring that this position is maintained at the level of the head in the neck area.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	The joint pain is sixty-six years old and has been taken apart in its entirety.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And apply pressure with poultice; it is worthy of sheep'sew bordered dressing.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	When it is necessary to heat that area on the forehead with warmth for measurement purposes, and when they feel pain in their body at this time, so indicates suffering.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Return it within the head'dict in their neck at its circle location and place your hand to warm them up there.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	When the melancholalga affects the entire body throughout the week, and enters into another of its treatments until it is healed; or if you wish to, then anneal small points on the affected parts as instructed by law: this type of cautery moistens the brain when equalized.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And place that stoppage at the border or in linseed oil.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol .xii.: (This line is not an actual text but
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	When translated into English, the medieval medical treatise excerpt you provided reads:
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you declare the patient' extrusion of water through their joints where they feel it in the division (indicating a leak or effusion), then begins to give into and pour out from the malady head, allowing the poured downwardly that which cleanses the top of his body; keep watch over all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	When that sweet scent enters through water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	When I cut all the veins and arteries with which it has been done, these are the cauterizations in that long at the temple'dictum of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	Guard thy wound when it is being cauterized; and if you see any discharge from the site of healing, apply some medicine to it, which may be within your means.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And when one arrives with knowledge that is outside of the arches and abdomen, caution regarding fluid flows must be taken into account.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And in some cases, they are cauterized at the joint of two bones with tools made by their hands.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii.: (Note: This line appears incomplete or possibly
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	The translation for "Cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas" from Latin could be interpreted as follows in English, with some context
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the ancient tears of humans are excessively secreted and found in the veins and arteries where they appear near the forehead to be superfluous mucous membranies, then that which we have recorded concerning water poured on hairs (perhaps referring to a traditional remedy), it is necessary to cauterize this area of excessive moisture in our head section and at two specific points: one above the temple by placing two hot coals near bones found there, and another directly over where nerves emerge from beneath the skull cap (cervix).
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	If there are ingestions of excess (indicating an imbalance or accumulation in the body), then it is necessary to apply cauterization on all parts above and below the knee joint, where small cautions will be applied for this purpose.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitol .xiiii. (The given phrase does not contain enough context or
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	In reference to medieval medical texts, which may use a mix of languages due to translations and interpretations over time, the sentence
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you do not properly care for the discharge from division and neglect your treatment, then apply cold compresses to the affected area on top of it; and rub gently along its head, thus performing lithotripsy (breaking up stones in the bladder or kidney). In this context:
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And if it is necessary to apply one of these (pointed) cauteries on the two overjoints above each hair, do so accordingly:
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	When it comes to using an arrow that you do not pierce through or harm,
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	From this instrument of cautery is this form.
Capitol .xv.	The provided medieval medical text appears to be discussing treatments for conditions like joint
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	When translating the given line from a possible Old French or Medieval Latin context, we get: "And when it is necessary to use instruments of blepharoplasty
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the patient's eyelid is affected by illness or moisture, there should be used a specific type of lancet for this purpose—this instrument represents its form and method. This sentence reflects medieval medical practice where precise tools were employed to address issues such as swelling (mollification) due to various reasons like disease or excessive humidity in the environment around an individual's eye area ("palpebra del huel"). Here, "cauteriza" translates to applying cautery—a treatment that would have been used historically for procedures
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	If you are the practitioner (vos), then apply a small lancet over both cheeks using two cauteries in their entirety; these instruments will lengthen out from within each of your nostrthy, indicating that they not only serve for external treatment but also possibly to promote healing through internal effects. Here "cauteriza" once again means applying the burning tool (a lancet) used by medieval doctors ("med
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	The length of each instrument must correspond to that which is necessary, as per traditional measurement standards—this reflects the attention given in historical medical practice to tailoring treatment precisely according to a patient's specific needs ("so
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Do not press down with your hand on the instruments used for blepharoplasty—might do so depending upon how much of the eyelid's delicate membrane has become dry (adhered), which suggests a cautious approach to treatment, mindful of avoiding further irritation or injury ("la tersa partida"). This sentence advises on gentle
Capitol .xvi.	In translating this medieval medical text line by line into English, we maintain an
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	And with the forceps of the eye lid when their hair turns to particles and pinch the patient's head.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hair of the head turns into parts that pain when touched (likely referring to a skin condition), then with these two instruments for pinching or possibly burn treatment as remedies:
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you have a cautery for the patient'dict, command the humors to exit from their hairs along with those that are present in the world outside; keep them extended and inflamed until they do so; if you also hold back this outflow by your cautery, tightly bind one of these streams around its flow within the pores through which it exits into the body's cavities—this prevents further entry.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	So when virgins are born and bathed in the womb of their mother, they pause breath at the top of the head within the mouths (palpebre), whereby a second sign is present as per the figure on its forehead, which also corresponds to the covering of the hair.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	With rest applied over it in an oil or poultice made of flaxseed, on the wound area.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Return the cautery with which this is made of fire.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And cauterize the figure on which the patient stands, little by little through slow movements, until it is burned off completely where there was bone marrow of myrtle present; all appears proper in its own right.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "The sign of sanitation from the body' extrinsic is that you must press your eye lid and have their hair standing up due to the needle prick.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And lift your hand and place it there for three days until the shield is erected inside where you are positioned.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And apply care for that which is within it so as it may heal.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If any reason returns them and their eyelids become softened, then they shall use other instruments on that body part as well when it had been touched initially with these tools firstly.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	May the hairs be in the corner of the eye where they are naturally located and do not pierce with a needle, then cauterize that which is elevated to its proper place.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	May the cautery of medicine burn this out so that the melancholy takes in and coats its hairs as wool does, according to your command for it to enter where there are prolonged and ingrown hairs; place its fate on a piece of cloth like mirtle'dict.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Pause le dit sobre le medicine and apply that small one without letting it enter where there is malady.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	When the patient perceives that which has been bitten by a tooth, they lay it down and take whatever liquid this teeth gives; when the bite ceases, they wash out what mouth fluid there is with water from above or incision site as well if their eyelid (possibly) rose during cleansing. And consider whether your operation has not been carried out where no medicine intervention occurred and nothing entered into that which should remain closed while the procedure takes place, thus contravene to close both ends of what was opened for treatment purposes.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Return your hand above the area where the tailbone is healed and take care of that same cushion or another within which it has been kept until its recovery, as well as ensuring any other necessary treatment in those areas to keep hands safe from harmful impacts during rest.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	Here is the line by line translation:
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is how one uses myrtle resin for treatment.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	Be aware that men'thy humors are diverse according to size and smallness (or perhaps height), hence your contraction is caused by them.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	If you have not applied pressure along this path leading towards him here in our study,
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol .xvii.: (This line does not appear to be part of
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	The treatment or cauterization of a tear duct fistula in the eye's lacrimal apparatus can generally involve medical procedures aimed at closing off the abnormal passage that has formed, often due to an
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you care for a fistula as described earlier in the divisions of diseases and do not apply your treatment, there will be consequences: order that fluid cease flowing into it (presumably referring to tears or other fluids entering through the tear duct fistula), hold back any excess with one hand so that nothing overflows at this head during such action.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Return your hand pressure over his body in an oil or woolen pad on top of him.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Return the hot irons of which this is the form;
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	When it is conquered like a thorn or sickle form, with the one part where the instrument (cauter) touches, so that healing can occur at this point.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	If you go inward into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	If you wish it to come out as an attempt.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	May it be better for that person at work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	When an abscess is opened, apply salve and let it dry out that thing therein;
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If not unsealed, then work that area and extract the poultice from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Return the flame of the cauterization you hold over it and place your hand there to prevent yourself or the humors from becoming restless; when done, move the cauterization needle above the nose part at birthplace, so that neither yours nor the patient'seum is disturbed.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	So if the caustic entered into the mouth, do so; and otherwise repeat the application of the caustic for a week or two as per medical practice, allowing that period to pass by three days before checking on its healing over this borderland area with dry poultices enclosed within it until recovery.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	May it be that they have passed x days and are not healed yet? Then, over this sharp acute medicine within which the bone must become revealed and straightened as deemed necessary in their capital city courtroom.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula is healed by the water that we have drawn from cautery and treatment, well done; but if not, it is necessary to administer disentangling of nose (which could imply unblocking or clearance methods) and reduce the fistula in its nasal cavity as soon as possible when at hand.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii. (The ".xviii." part might refer
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	When it comes to the application of a caustic for cuts in feet, here is an interpretation and translation: When treating open wounds on the
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	 Moisturizing creams soothe cracks in lips, mostly in children'dict: When applying moisturizers to treat chapping or cracking of the lips (commonly found on babies), this statement suggests that such conditions are often seen in infants and their use can provide relief
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So asserviendo ao remédio mencionado anteriormente (presumably a moisturizer or o similar treatment), you are not addressing the cracks in our discussions and neglecting your own healing process, much like applying a small caustic to cutaneous wounds: This sentence implies that by focusing solesly on external treatments without self-reflection (the "cracks" or issues) within one's personal growth ("wound"), similar remedies are applied superficially. Here, the speaker likens their introspection and potential healing
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And if its condition follows as subtlety (perhaps referring to a delicate or nuanced situation), here is an interpretation: If the state of affairs within adheres closely to intrica
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And if you pause that initial discomfort within the cracks of those treated areas, then: This sentence suggests taking a moment to rest or calm any immediate pain inside (within) where treatment has been applied for skin cracking. Here "preon de las fissuras" metaphorically refers to an inner state before complete healing; by pausing and allowing oneself some relief
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And if you care for him/her within the space where they are being treated or recover, then: The speaker encourages attentive nurturing of someone who is ill
Capitol .xix.	The provided text seems like an excerpt from medieval medical literature where symptoms
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Cauterization of a mouth ulcer or fistula is likely what this line refers to in the context of treating such a condition historically:
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When addressing an ulcer or fistula in the uvula, palate, or teeth (which has decayed and is becoming loose), you must first cover it with gauze as required for that area's healing process; afterward apply a cauterizing torch according to how much there seems necessary on the ulcer. Place this flame wherein lies the fistula, so your hand can be within reach while allowing enough time (typically one or two days) until fiery metal enters and breaks through at that spot; during which period you must observe it attentively to prevent further harm as directed in these instructions for treatment.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	So if the illness is cured and health returns to you, be content; but if not, then it's necessary to discover wherein lies decayed bone and hold firmly according as each comes forth in its turn within his skull.
Capitol .xx.	Capital Roman numeral XX (assuming "Capitol
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Regarding the curing of teeth and relief from gums' inflammation.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the veins are softened by moisture and the teeth become decayed; treat those with medicine, but do not apply it directly here on top of the head where the waist meets the belly below the chest, then heat that very same cautery which is about to be applied so that you can pause its application over the tongue and insert into this hot implement while your hand holds tight therein; thus ensuring warmth from the fire source at the tip of the tongue spreads downward.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Return your hand (your lap), and repeat some of the cautions as you wish/need.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Here the putrition (rot) in the mouth is rinsed with saltwater and held there for an hour, after which it pukes up that thing; when the loose tooth becomes firmly set and the soft gums become tautened, this cleanses corrupted humidity.
Capitol .xxi.	The given text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	From "cauterization of tooth pain":
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to inflammation or a cold within the body, and it does not respond well to medicine treatment, then apply poultices on those two areas as second measures: an application of warmth at cow' extrications (likely meaning near calf muscles), or direct heat.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautions are those by which you grasp the border of cows and barrels within the forge'thy workbench, placing a clamp on its extremity where pain festins as if inflamed; similarly secure that very same edge with borders secured together, keeping it over the area experiencing agony to prevent further swelling.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	Return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from protruding again until the heat of the fever subsides in the head (i.dictorium).
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	If you wish, submerge wool or cloth under there above it, and place that upon the sore tooth, whereby the red-hot iron will reach the cavity of the affected tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	Even when the cauterization is at the heart (the central point), you attend to the swelling or redness in the body'dict, and ensure that it does not reach the mouth of the malady.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Return the shape of the instrument to where it will come, and apply heat over its tip while you keep your hand inside so that the cautery becomes hot; this may be applied several times when the pain is heightened or in that day or another.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	When that instrument (cauterizer) used by the malady opens its mouth of good boundary and holds it for an hour, then this is how the treatment with said instrument goes on.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	When you cut or remove as much as is within your power, that's when cutting should be done according to what can be achieved by yourself.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is how the cannula looks like:
Capitol .xxii.	The text provided is composed of medieval medical terminology mixed with elements that can be
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Regarding external ulcers, they should undergo cauterization to heal the lesion and stop further ble
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When external ulcers are caused by fleas and infiltrated humors that do not submit to digestion through medicine, you must apply the cauterization instrument necessary for this condition. You should have two handles so it can be lit with fire; use one handle to ignite while holding onto another part of the tool. Keep burning at intervals until reaching the ulcer'thy base—that is where treatment progresses if ingested remedies are also used, ensuring they arrive in time for healing before potential worsening or complications such as ossification (prepon del apostema).
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the apoplectic is small in size, then use the cautery according to its quantity; apply it for three days and rest over it until such time that which has been ignited by the flame of the focus (fire) cools down again.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Return that which is ill (am) in it with care and ointments and bandages inside so that it may heal.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The form of the catheter or pointed instrument for such an operator is this.
Capitol .xxiii.	The provided text seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discuss
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	In the context of historical or traditional medicine, "cauzeria del roxie" could refer to procedures used for treating severe pain in a joint (such as arthritis), potentially involving methods that involve heat application like
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity enters the lungs and mainly when there is chest constriction or cramping pain, it's customary for doctors to evacuate phlegm using medicines that act as laxatives, in order to cauterize (or burn) the affected area of the lung.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	Guard yourself so that you do not reach for the cautery at the joint nor burn your tongue with its heat, but only a little bit.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And apply that other pointed cautery specifically on the joint of your spine at its lower end, please.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The lancet of him is cut in the previous manner.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Return care for that which has entered before it shall be healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	The text provided appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discussing
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	When addressing the treatment of chest illness and cough:
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When a cold humidity causes the chest illness and there is no fever or inflammation, then two lances of cauterization are applied on the breastbone at those places where bone marrow and wind reside; and another lance in its place within the body'dictum (breast), with each instrument shaped according to precedent.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	If you wish, then the points of your caustic will be like those to which you call upon for pain relief in arthritis joints.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	When points are entered into those areas, and care is given for that which was introduced earlier to ensure it heals properly.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	Now, three lances are available for this form of cauterization that you can perform: one as a dressing (one lance), two more in accordance with the current method described herein.
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol .xxv.: This line is difficult to interpret as it appears
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	This Latin-like sentence seems to refer to the process of cauterizing a wound, particularly at its head or source – which in this context likely means where medical intervention is most needed
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of assistance is displaced due to fluid lubrication and it does not return in time for your water's customary flow back, then you must move gently as we have witnessed; after reducing the dislocation with first aid measures taken by yourself or others present herein (assumedly indicating someone offering help), bring the malady – presumably a hernia mentioned earlier due to context clues - back onto your thighs or lower abdomen, overlying what remains of its initial position. Also raise that cushion which is in contact with this specific part affected by dislocation; specifically if it's within your groin area where the issue originated before first aid was applied on one side (your left).
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Return the caustic has two heads; this is its form.
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And apply caustic within where that which enters from another lodgment will emerge, and thus the figure of a caustic treatment appears with those other applied caustics.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	So that they follow according to the amount of effort; this is how it should be done.
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And in some ways they are adjusted according to this count (count being related to specific procedures or methods), whereby the number of stakes used is eight.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Return the pressure over the points of caustic salt on your hand and make sure that the humors stick to tranquility, so that none of these parts will be ill for any time as long as they are comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If the dislocation is at those parts below and pain occurs therein, then apply caustic substances on muscle or motz cautery points, whereby the joint is confirmed and moisture becomes dissipated, thus curing the malady (suggestive of a hernia).
Capitol .xxvi.	The provided text seems to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Regarding cautery of the stomach, here is my translation:
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When humors ferment and condense within it, causing them to multiply in the body, if you continue your healing practices without addressing this condition, his malady will rise above their upper part for they are not supported properly; extend their limbs and hips, and apply cauterization with three lancets: one lance according to the amount of blood drawn by that single lancer, two more as directed in the previous treatment (likely referring to a specific procedure), inside which condensation will return its triangular shape. Stretch out those not yet adjusted so they can perform pusillanimous movement (meaning weak or feeble movements).
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	If the depth of the cautery corresponds to the quantity of both thresholds (or borders) of the pelvic girdle'dictum, then:
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And if the stomach is burned by that very cautery you fear, and it'dicts how much of this burning you wish to attempt on your own; also apply such treatment at those points where already cauterized with similar methods beforehand, so long as healing has not yet occurred.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol .xxvii.: (This line likely refers to a specific section or
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	In this context, "Cauteirar el fetge frete" could be interpreted as referring to the process of ligating or t
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When joint pain occurs in the foot due to excess moisture or humidity within what is normally a healthy bodily composition and as if it were an outgrowth beyond necessary expulsion from the body itself; when this swelling of the malady causes discomfort, coverings are applied above the head so that the distress does not worsen. Then three cauterizations according to their nature and quantity shall be placed by hands immediately upon doctors near bedside as soon as possible following its emergence from within or beneath a person's abdomen – under control of home caregivers with urgent medical attention required for the swolthy condition that has surfaced.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	Wherever there are spaces between each instrument according to its size and where the instruments themselves follow the length of the body'dicts:
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not purchase your lame with caustic instruments.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	If the amount of fluid that is ingested exceeds the capacity of what has been consumed from the stomach, and it's not adjusted; and if the humors remain on the feet, they will swell up, which already have extended their limbs, lift their breasts.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	This is how the cautery should be used:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And when you have the subtlety and prudence in art, it is possible to use these cautery tools for treating wounds on the skin surface.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	Ensure you do not continue the cauterization process, and secure all of your instruments to the area around the navel so that it is fully sealed therein where the navel lies close by; be aware of this as well.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii. (This line appears to be referencing a specific section
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	When it comes time for the puncturing of an appendicitis, use caution.  
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	Whenever there is an inflammation or ulcer in the foot and you wish to know if that abscess is within the flesh of the foot or in its clothing (tunic), if it' extramares, then the humoral disorder exacerbates gravity and pain intensifies.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If it is in the breeches of the patient and the pain is greatly intensified even as doctors have already fatigued themselves caring for them,
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	So that the patient'thy humors are directed towards his cervix (the neck or lower back region), and place therein their remedy to try; also apply fire to those instruments assembled by him, which was described on another page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And heat treat that which is within the neck (or throat), where it enters and turns into disease.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Return that for care so as it heals within other applications.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	Not only do we use this form of cautery but that which has been studied in the art of medicine and upon which various ailments have come to be understood; perhaps I may dare some experiments on this operation, yet let us not deviate from what is prescribed for it.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol XXIX. (The Roman numeral "XXIX" represents
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Cautery of ulcers. This translation assumes that the original Latin text refers to a medical procedure involving some form of
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Cautery of ulcers involves making incisions as per this mannerism; here you must grasp the sharp instruments used for cutting out large pre-existing wounds and remove them carefully using their robust handles. This translation interprets a medieval medical procedure where cauterization, or burning to close a wound (commonly employed at that time), is described in relation to treating ulcers by excising affected areas with precision tools as detailed by the author's guideline for treatment within this context of ancient medicine.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	When you are preparing your hand with a pointed cautery, it is in the form of gout related to the knee joint'dictated by its symptoms and nature of occurrence.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And already dispatched some of those that are like the use of iron in flame and fire, placing them into that place where they lie between the ribs until they arrive at that wound therein for healing as with what we have described concerning male patients' cautery.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	May not fear in this incision for it will only worsen the fistula here that cannot heal itself.
Capitol .xxx.	In this text, it seems like medical advice from medieval times is being
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	When referring specifically to a procedure involving "the wound" (melsa), likely in the context of setting or closing a fract
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the wound and do not apply your treatment as described in our discussion of healing methods, three or four lancets are used according to the length of the wound following the figures shown on these instruments previously introduced by us—these being correct procedures themselves:
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each of the caustics this or that small tool (perhaps a lancet and scissors), their handling is the same as what we have described in the care for foot instruments.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	Even though your hand is not with the points of the lancet, and gout resides on both sides (of the body), it must be kept under control by these instruments/procedures.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And another method of cauterization is such that you ignite both wounds, which causes them in the capitol region (hip area) for dislocation of muscles and inflammation at the base where the uterus descends due to black bile.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And when your lifting is according to the length of the leg, so that they are branded accordingly by the laws of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	When you bring together the two sinews and fire energy within that space where they enter into each other'dictating another region of the body, do so with care to prevent injury or damage.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Return the points of the cautery; therefore they have four cauteries applied.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	If you go, then use three kinds of cautery that have been prepared.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And for your care of the cautery you placed on their groin area, which may have been observed over several days, it could indicate that other preceding causes in treatment are relevant as well.
Capitol .xxxi.	The provided text appears to be translating medical practices or observations into English from what
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	From Latin, which was commonly used in medieval medicine texts alongside other contemporary languages like Italian and French due to the influence of
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	In English: We do not burn wounds on joints but rather treat them properly according to their nature directly in these areas specifically. (Here, "ydropic" likely refers to a type
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	Translating this complex medieval medical text into English line by line:
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	The quantity of the depth of the cautery is determined by the sharpness of the needle.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Return the caustic points that have been opened for you so that they can be bound with rope or thread over time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	Not until the excess of bile is drained from him using those cups that are filled with water for his intentions to be fulfilled, and if he has been overeating, at this time aid in his recovery.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery is what it burns onto, following the form that came before, and this is what they will be burning on both sides as previously indicated by their forms.
Capitol .xxxii.	The given text appears to describe medieval medical practices for addressing certain conditions like joint
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	From what you've provided, it seems the line "Capitol .xxxii." likely refers to a specific section or page number in an ancient medical manuscript discuss
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are soaked in waters and filled with liquid as to swell them upwardly at both ends of the foot—between the earlobe (auricular) and ankle ring (anular), cauterize over there, carefully using a caustic substance without twisting it; raise your hand holding the caustic tool. Do not retract entirely or return to this position because water remains trapped within due its persistence in resistance against drainage.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate line by line:
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	Here comes the line to translate: E sia le cauteri segnola longitud della coscia: i denolh uno sopra l'altro, ed un altro sul mezzo del corpo di quella; e su ogni gamba due forze d'incendio.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Lay down the patient's child for a long time, so that no water returns from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Return care for those causes which have been mentioned hereinabove.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any coherent text
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	The provided Latin phrase translates into English as follows, focusing on the topic of internal wounds or surgical intervention:
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	Translation of the Latin medical phrase concerning internal wounds: When abdominal pains are due to over-saturation and resulting inflammation within which digestive and retaining functions occur in both stomach and intestines, it is curated with poultices for healing purposes without further complaints. Sometimes these same pains may exhibit themselves through external wounds requiring cauterization; then a great caustic applied to the abdomen as previously done on the stomach itself or along its circumference and at four specific points within it, fine-pointed lancets employed for puncture (cautery), also used over larger abscesses located above joints.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	If you perceive the humors as exuberant and excessively rising within (the belly), then burn that over the pentacle area and on the swellings; furthermore, adjust these cauterizations above the stomach and around the inguinas (groins/testicles in modern terminology) to correct their nutritional state without fault.
Capitol .xxxiv.	The provided text is challenging due to its archaic language structure that incorpor
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Cauterization of ancient ulcers." - This line suggests a medical procedure from historical times where physicians would burn the area around an old, possibly chronically
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When in nature old ulcers are caused by thick humors or moisture-corrupted fluids and their treatment is given herein within the division without curing it with poultice, then three caustics above spondal haemorrhoidal pus of small size on top petty triangles will be cauterized using two douches underne each ombelcus.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If the patient's stomach is inflamed and their food has not been digested, or if they have swelled up at some point, then perform that treatment over the large cauterizer as previously done; and a cauterizer on the breast bone (likely referring to an area near the sternum), another on the mouth/throat with a sharp instrument ('cauteria clavilha'), leaving them for any amount of time, ensuring that they enter so they may heal.
Capitol .xxxv.	In order to provide an accurate translation for "Capitol .xxxv.,
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	For the treatment of hernia, place it back into its cavity (abscess).  
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you withdraw the artery, then heat the instruments that were assembled for it.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Return the burning element to that area of the belly from which it originated and last place your hand inside so that the instruments reach their destination in the opening of the vessel where blood flows, through which sanctity passes.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you use a large cautery above all else, it may strengthen vitality.
Capitol .xxxvi.	The given text seems to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Cauterization of natural ulcers that are found in the parts of life (body).
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not heed the work that is recommended for this place and the patient becomes frightened by it, they are healed through caution (likely referring to a careful or conservative approach in treatment).
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Thus when any one comes with an opening in nature and it is ancient, illness of the body becomes sick due to wet and corrupted humors, therefore such person who has this subtle touch should be aware that they must address how much depth there is ahead of where we have tried.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Return with caution (the) hot iron that seems like fire.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Return that burning cautery there and adjust according to how much it enters into the wound.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Iterate within those who are chafed by the caustic for a period of three days or so, according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Return care for where it has healed inside that there should be maintained healthiness or recovery in this place (the area previously treated).
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the place is sealed off and materials are removed from it, rest assured that for a long time recovery has been completed or achieved in its entirety (meaning if everything necessary to close an injury with proper healing was done).
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the materials are not laid out in their proper place within it (the body), you will understand that they penetrate or rot at its base layer, due to those causes which may come back into memory for this location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise attempting to
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	From your fragment, it seems you're referring to the treatment of ulcers or sores ("ronhos" can
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	 When pain in ulcers comes from inflammation or heavy breathing, and the patient clutches their abdomen (possibly indicating discomfort), it is time to perform cauterization on each sore spot so that one can remember which area was treated previously. This suggests a methodical approach where after treating an ulcerated region with heat or some form of thermal therapy, the medical practitioner marks these areas (likely using charcoal) for future reference to avoid re-treatment during subsequent visits and maintains continuity in care.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And so with a small pause for cautioning (to ensure safety), three thin threads of cautery will be applied, thus serving as the last treatment in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discussing
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Regarding "de cauterizacio de la vesica," which translates line by line into English as follows
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When you acidify and soften the bladder due to fever or humidity that prevents mucus from being retained in it, then perform a cauterization on the pus area of the bladder; use fur pelts for this purpose within its region. Also cauterize at the seventh part (potentially referring to anatomical divisions) and another with your instrument here:
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each caustic according to the quantity from the toe; and burn that which needs burning in the lower part of the back or both if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	When it is necessary for the pointed cautery mentioned earlier (in this context referring to a medical instrument used in medieval times), then proceed with its use as
Capitol .xxxix.	I'm sorry, but I can't provide translations or interpret content
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	When it comes to the topic of treating hernias (referred as "mayra" in medieval medical termin
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When hernias fester and moisture is present, it is forbidden to impinge upon them, as this corrupts the menstrual flow of a woman, delaying its onset; consequently, they inflict severe pain which necessitates their treatment. This should be done at three points around the umbilicus using cauterizing tools—similarly employed for treating wounds in bleeding (referred to here as 'menstrual flow'). At two additional sites close by these spots with a lancet, or use exactly that tool's sharp end.
Capitol .xl.	Captain of the hundredth (referring possibly to one'thy
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	For treating the dislocation of the ankle, here is a possible translation: When it comes to setting right the displacement of the ankle (or applying caution or
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture exudes from the part of the ankle joints and these are considered causes for dampness in that region; hence, it is called a swollen knee (note: there appears to be confusion between 'ankle' and possibly another body part like 'knee').
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The location of the dislocation is being twisted here (in this place).
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	And when you cauterize the maul over the share of the ankle with a scalpel-like instrument, place it there where he is already twitching as if disturbed by your intervention, so that his limb falls into the warmth provided at this spot.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	If that is the form used in stomach cauterization as well.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this cautery is not with you now, then use three such large caustic cauteries instead.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When applying the points of cautery according to the quantity required for the entire colon, ensure that whatever enters into it will heal.
Capitol .xli.	The text provided appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	From the context of your request, it seems you're asking for translations related to historical or traditional practices concerning joint pain and treatment methods
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the joint of ankle and it is caused by accumulated fluids or foul-smelling pus, doctors use previously mentioned remedies that will not aggrave matters but are ancient methods; for these purposes they employ a cauterizing agent.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The manipulation of the cautery in that second use is either a medicine burn or focused burning: when using the cautery as medicine and heating (focused), for each situation choose accordingly.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And as for the spaces between each application of cauterization, consider both their quantity and whether they are small or large (i.dict 'cauterizations' in this context).
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	May there be some restraints placed on the wound above the neck for which four cauteries are used.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	If you wish, cauterize at the circle where form was previously directed during the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle; and that it be a complete circuit encircling all of the knee joint.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is how the cautery (heating instrument) application occurs when pain clings to the abdomen and does not extend into the hollow of the thighs.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	May it be extended into the thigh, then there will be two cauldrons over that place where you introduced the evil humors causing pain; and one more caldron placed on the wound for four days to take care of the patient' extraterrestrial part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	If the pointed cautery reaches into the depth according to the length of the needle'seed (possibly referring to a specific measurement or technique), then:
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	If the malady infiltrates and causes pain within these parts of the feet where it hurts, then here you will perform cauterization at this place that is infected; do so for three or four punctures, or as needed according to what they feel.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If the evil humors circulate down into the hollow of the thigh and cause pain there, then apply herein an ulceration with a sharp cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And as for the entirety of your cautery that should not touch the nervous system or large intestine in an indiscreet manner, it is over there on purpose where you have them poorly placed and without certain knowledge (meaning lack of understanding).
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already seen another of those whom I have burned on the wound and lastly in the cauterization process; their swelling has entered into the body through that opening (the focus), which was inflated within, causing total corruption of the flesh there.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	When abdominal pain occurs suddenly (a sudden severe stomachache), and it is necessary for water or life itself (necessary fluids/water are needed to sustain life).
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain is divided into two parts by this method of cautery, then perform treatment on each section separately according to this approach.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Here enters another third element; and that space between them is the quantity of notes on the foot' extrication. And these circles are filled with two parts, and their length corresponds to one or two beats per circle—these we dress in metal for those spaces. This constitutes its form:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Return it is lit within the fire wherein it darkens and sparks are made; return placed upon the division of the sinew, honey drips down over the flesh below.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	So then you will perform three cauterizations in a single session (or "guaida").
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Apply it there for three days, apply bandage and restraint it daily for several days until healed within the ointment.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis: Oh children, of this particular kind of cautery we seldom use for the examination and therefore only occasionally find those which act upon it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	May those who endure with them use these lancets here, and cause great torment in their place.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	May cauterys be attached to the medicine if you make two circles with a perforated instrument in which goes through, there whereby the length of their legs will correspond as either twigs or small sticks those things.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	If the space between them contains the quantity of their body'dict size; and they are loose above and below it, holding together in this manner.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English: Place your hand over the part of the patient' extricable, and place it on that part as well; apply cold water with a finger between two circles, whereby its quality becomes small bit by bit until for an hour has passed—therefore inflicting chilling blows to pull out (the obstinate worm). And when this parasite ceases biting, you have extracted it.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	In translating this line by line, here's what I get in English:
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Return the ligature to that place for three days and rest on it until the blackness of inflammation subsides, apply water therapy for a few days, then run over with warmth—this will restore health quickly.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return that healing balm within it so that it may be cured.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain extends within the coccyx or the abdomen, make it stand in that which contains water as soon as it is felt in the navel area.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is how gout manifests itself, and I have already written it in the treatise on medical correction.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkali and cause not extinguished on both sides by one, thrust the two apart into a new wave in which their side division is pierced through with a small trap, according to what enters within them.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	So from some of the remedies used, they are applied with touch and warm honey mixture to determine if mixed together they become a suitable treatment for you herein described.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	E Gualia recounts of an ancient home where the operation and care are what cure the pain in the knee and sciatic nerve, which is a great pleasure to be from that place; they do not need other kinds of healing, for every day'dictor recommends bathing there with medicinal herbs as today (which means using them freshly picked or newly prepared).
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is believed to be caused by certain rheumatisms or recent fractures; and if not due to the latter, then pinched with a few grays (likely iron pins used for treatment) and placed on the thigh in which there is pain, or in the hollow of the leg, or at the joint between legs and chest where it hurts.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	When set for three hours or when the malady releases a hundred days of stagnation,
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Return that into bath and when the patient'thy body is washed, place it upon the ground so that pain ceases and they recover healthily.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	Be aware that not all who use this medicine do so for purification of the body, but rather they seek its expulsion from the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	May Socrates say that when the vein of a goat is cauterized, it affects their blood; and these are the treatments according to this method: wool and honey mixed in oil antiseptic, applied between the feet and thighs.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And close the crack of dry skin with bread dough, and place it over wool and linen where it is drawn out.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Return and do not cease applying water until the sharpness of the needle' extrudes into the sinew, stopping the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this operation of cautery is called a caustic procedure (or treatment).
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol .xlii. (Assuming "Capitol" refers to
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	The translation of "de cauterizacio de dolor de dos" from a medieval medical context could be interpreted as
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	This translation attempts to convey the idea that sometimes pain can originate in both legs due to various causes such as inflammation or injury from blows and piercing wounds; also because of excessive evacuation, reminiscent of diarrhea-like symptoms. The cauterization might involve immersing materials soaked with foul (potentially blood) fluids into water to extract the bad humors or impurities as a form of treatment:
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And with this particular type of applied heat, which is caused by effusion of fluid, do not apply the cautery on it alone but only in that specific area where pain occurs due to excess humors causing inflammation and accumulation (Note: This translation attempts to capture medieval medical terminology while making modern sense. "C
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	So cover the patient's hernia with pillows and imitate them (referring possibly to a body part or object), wherein there is pain spread over three lines according to your teaching, place fingers along any one of these lines if cauterization seems appropriate based on the amount tolerated by both the condition itself and its nature.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And it is necessary for a point of inflammation or painful area (likely referring back to joints) to be treated with points, using pointed cautery specifically designed
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, perform three or four burns on the middle part of it using these pointed lancets as described here. This instruction suggests a traditional medical procedure from medieval times where specific points are made on certain body parts to treat an issue—likely related to joint pain associated with gout mentioned earlier in the text. The use
Capitol .xliii.	If you wish, then create three or four puncture marks using these pointed surgical
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Perform the burning procedure for treating corns (a hardened and thickened part of the skin on toes, usually due to ill-fitting shoes
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Rocks must be moved to alleviate this ailment in children, and as the evening approaches with its elevation of spirit and motion, it is our duty (as caregivers) to touch their bodies gently on purpose; likely referring to providing comfort or potentially correcting alignment issues that could contribute to pain. This line indicates an approach consistent with medieval thinking where gentle physical intervention was believed necessary as part of the treatment during certain times aligned with spiritual beliefs about life's rhythms, possibly implying a link between body and spirit health in child care practices at
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And now the vertebrae of the lower back (in this case, possibly referring to parts that have begun rising above others in terms of misalignment) are beginning their ascent among those previously mentioned ones; suggesting early signs or symptoms relevant for treatment within a historical medical context. This line suggests observations about spinal health and its possible imp
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you take hold of it (implying the urgency or intervention moment) and wish to forbid its progress, then treat that pointed lancet specifically formed into a circle as instructed here; indicating an immediate course of action using circularly shaped cautery points for prevention against further deterioration. This directive from medieval medical practice implies
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	That they blow over the entire section of the spinal disc involuntarily.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	If you wish, perform cauterization along the spinal column with points made on two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	These are the points that belong to them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Return care for the location within which it has been healed with what we have provided.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	May you ensure that the caustic is not applied in a blistered state, but rather for muscle cramps.
Capitol .xliv.	From the given context of medieval medical texts with influences from Latin, Italian,
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of gout and joint pain treatment.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And when gout is healed by the medicinal treatment and not left with residual pains, then apply bandages or poultices as appropriate to alleviate discomforts.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	When you are caustering that which is expulsion in the circulatory loop of the joint between the foot and leg, with proper burning tools (cauterization).
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	That is the form of this tool: (referred here as 'olive wood') a heated lancet used for treatment.
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then use a pointed cautery for that purpose.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If pains penetrate into the abdomen or other joints, and motion causes them distress, it is necessary to apply a lancet on any of those spots with three or four lancing instruments from this very same cautery for relief.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If you need more lancets that these are necessary for use, then apply the one needed without pressing too hard with your hand on them previously used; do this only to send out (possibly implying removal or testing) the contents of the bladder.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If pain enters into both legs, then apply the treatment we have mentioned earlier on their chest (head).
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If the pains are only in the limbs alone, and it is called suppuration (indicating inflammation or abscess formation), then a point shall be made on the circuit of the fevered vessels following their circulatory route along these two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If there are remaining pains in the joints, then points will be made on the circumference of each node and around the painful area (of the body).
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If joint or muscle pain comes upon the legs during certain days, then they will perform cautery on all parts of their attendants.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	No one removes the swolthy from good regimen and intake of medicine unless a proper treatment with this tool is performed; then God helps.
Capitol .xlv.	The provided text is from an old medical manuscript with phrases that reflect Middle A
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Regarding the treatment of fractures." This line indicates a topic related to methods for dealing medically with broken
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a break in the bones and cauterization of the wound with boiled clay applied to the navel, thus you command that malady release its sustenance within itself today using gentle causes so as not for it to perforate one's stomach." This line suggests an ancient remedy involving applying heat (boiling) and specific location of treatment on a wound with clay or similar substances. The intention is likely focused on internal healing where the body, through these interventions, would be prompted to repair its own tissues without causing additional harm such as perforating within itself – possibly referring to damage inside the stomach region associated with fractures and wounds at that time in history.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Here it goes: Follow the malady between your thighs on top of yourself and order that they hold their breath so that a hernia or protrusion appears (or an intestinal bulge).
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Return that to the thighs and hands where they attempt breakthrough, over there are sections of the body divided below which resembles the bottom end of a circle in these lower regions (the legs).
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Return the cautery of which this is its form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	When there is a reason for entering (and placing pinpoints).
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity and place your hand over the area to ensure that the intestine does not protrude outwards.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: You have already opened between the thighs of the patient and placed a cushion under them; another servant is on their legs, and another rests upon their chest holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe carefully the steam of the intestine during your cautery, to ensure that it does not rise upwards and cause death or another great harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	When you realize that when applying the cautery, you are not touching the patient' extranous parts (i.e., hands), do not perform your operation on them.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And when it comes to children' extrication with the pointed instrument according to its size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Return care for the site of the caustic for three days within which the wound is swollen.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	When that one is cured with these ointments inside where it should be healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The joint (or limb) affected by gout is rested on its two for forty days until the place and patient'se body are sealed shut.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	When nourishment is provided to the patient according to the length of time needed for their recovery, and ensuring that the intestine does not protrude outwardly, do so diligently in healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	When it is time for taking off the bandage after forty days, then apply and handle that with gentle linen dressing, holding it for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	If it is tissue movement and body replenishment with meat and drinks, which are used vigorthy, when one uses this entire healing regimen, then:
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And those who were healed initially with a three-sided cautery instrument are brought forward to attempt again. They have been placed so that they may try once more.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And there is a line that will pass through the hole left in the latch under pressure from rupture; and another above it where you place your hand with a cold iron needle, perhaps even better than when first applied as cautery.
Capitol .xlvi.	The provided text appears to be instructions or observations from an ancient medical treatise written
De cauterizacio de torcio.	From your single phrase "Capitol .xlvi.", it's not entirely clear what the full context
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When chronic pain in the limbs persists due to intervention or palpation by a healer and does not alleviate with traditional medicine, it is suggested that one should resort to localized application of points for relief through burning (cauterization).  
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	When using caustics for all body parts according to their magnitude and smallness, as well as the state of health and torture or pain experienced by them, take into account:
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if it is healed by the first application of cautery, then be; but if not, continue to apply on him these points for members directed towards the urinary organ in order that subsequent applications of cautery may lead to its healing within this malady.
Capitol .xlvii.	The given text seems to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discussing
De cauterizacio de lepra.	When it comes to the treatment of leprosy (or Hansen's disease) in the context provided,
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	For the treatment of leprosy (or Hansen's disease), some cases require significant cauterization, and in less severe instances if it is caused by decomposition products such as decayed fat or melancholy humors:
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy has already spread over the thigh and appears manifestly, then you must cauterize that part with these cautery tools which we have in our possession; at this point also use a cauterium on the extremity of the nose, two cauteriums each for their small mouths/anus (mouth), two cauteriums upon two vertebrae of the backbone, and various cauteriums corresponding to those parts: one large over some intervertebral discs, another over the chest; also apply two on joints, two on muscles belonging to your limbs' bones; furthermore place them twice each for hands (both palms), once per foot arches and toe-pads, double cauteriums upon both ankles/ankle pads, one over various finger joints, another at any knuckle of the hand. Then you must apply these tools to all articulations in your limbs as well as on each foot sole (sole).
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	Guard your nerves that are above the ankle so they do not burn these.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some treatments involve cauterization on the bones of the jaw and in other places such as the mouth of the stomach or the genitals.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	Here you understand that the more carefully you apply cauterization, the more it can heal and confer benefit; likewise, realize that there is no pain in the burns from these treatments as long as your hands are with them on his body.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	When it is necessary for the cautery (medical instruments used to stop bleeding) sizes according to the member and joints as previously indicated by the tools of these implements.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Return care for the pointed cautery with flour from beans and honey, which is within that it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Given that this medieval medical treatise contains elements reminiscent of Latin, Italian
De cauterizacio de stupor.	The phrase "de cauterizacio de stupor" refers to a treatment for shock or as an
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any member is struck or falls asleep and requires care from physicians (or "medics"), use caution, applying a cautery according to the severity of the injury or its smallness ("the greatness"/"small size").
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let the pointed cautery enter into the notch of the spine a few times.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And take care that it remains moist within where healing occurs.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And in some cases the numbness has been cauterized here and there on the upper body and feet, as well as between the spine'dict vertebrae of both sides where nerves are located, which is then alleviated (treated).
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	May not press on it but rather that individual who is knowledgeable in the anatomy of the body and nerve exit from all parts of the corpus, must act accordingly.
Capitol .xlix.	The provided medieval medical text seems cryptic due to archaic language usage that intertw
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Translation of the line: "Cautery treatment for malignant warts.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When the old liniments do not comfort patients with medicinal ointments and when you cauterize over that which has been previously applied (ointment), as long as there is still redness within what has entered into where the navel resides, and its color changes to brownish-red, then proceed accordingly.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .l.	Given that "Capitol" is not in Latin or any
De cauterizacio de cranc.	The phrase you've provided, "Cauterizia del cranc," appears to be written either partially in
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When the patient experiences pain and moves their head while lying down (presumably for treatment or examination), it is then necessary to perform a circular cauterization on that spot as they turn in bed, presumably relieving discomfort associated with an issue within the neck area. The text suggests a traditional medical practice where heat was applied directly over certain body parts following movement and turning positions – likely for alleviating pain or treating some localized condition affecting those
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And they observed that the spot was already burned (cauterized) at night before their intervention—they may not have seen it themselves but feared there might be an ulcer present; yes indeed, I had noticed signs of wounds during previous visits. This line continues from a medieval medical perspective where doctors note and treat symptoms observed in patients over time through multiple consultations or healings sessions - here the mention of burns potentially indicates chronic issues being managed with cauterization techniques possibly to manage pain, bleeding disorders (ulcers), or as part of their overall diagnostic
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And they placed a flat instrument (likely used for the procedure of removing or cutting out tissue) directly on that spot as we lay in bed—either doing so during our rest period hereafter mentioned earlier this way by nightly examination, suggesting continued monitoring and treatment using cauterization. Here medieval practitioners are detailing their methods – possibly indicative of a holistic approach to care
Capitol .li.	It seems you have referred to another source line with "Capitol
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	The phrase appears incomplete, but it suggests a reference to the cautioning of applying something—likely medicinal or treatment substance
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When someone is delayed in ripening, and it' extraneous flesh that causes this or due to the state of humors which makes them weakly full with little seed (semen), or because of time itself; you wish to hasten their ripening; then burn cauterize small puncture points throughout the body where excess moisture collects. And once done, those who are lacking will be satisfied in maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you wish to perform the incision of it for a caution, then heat that instrument with which this is made; apply it where needed so that bile flows upward into its chamber while inserting the needle therein.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the points that have been placed there are kept in place to ensure that the leg'sear is healed; and take care of what should be cured inside it, which means their blood circulation needs attention for recovery.
Capitol .lii.	Captain of sixty-sixth (This line appears nonsensical
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	The phrase "de cauterizacio di quel che è corrodente" translates to something like, 
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	When there is rot in the limb that moves around within you, it consumes dry wood ashes like fire if fed with breath (implying internal 'food' for decay). This line suggests an allegorical or symbolic understanding of disease; here "corrodent" might represent a rotting condition—perhaps gangrene in the limb. The
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Thus if you find the rot in the place where it suffered burns (cauterization), then light small torches for your cautery points and larger ones as needed, according to what is necessary at that location within which there's rot. This line continues with a practical method from medieval medicine—using heat or fire-like objects like large spitguns ("clavils motz paucs") in localized burn treatment (possibly for ulcerations). The mention of "igneys cauteris" underscores the therapeutic use of burning, a common practice to
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Therefore seal that which has been completely removed within where you expunge the entire rot and do not let any cause arise here (emphasizing thorough treatment). This line highlights a preventive measure in post-operative care, ensuring no residual issues remain after removing affected tissue. The consistent use of fire ("igneys cauteris") is indic
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Therefore apply pressure on that for three days and pause over the burned areas until oil mixed in has completely removed all scars and rot (suggesting a prolonged dressings or compresses treatment). This line describes an extended wound care process aimed at complete healing by removing scar tissue ("scaras") entirely, leaving no sign of decay. In this medieval context where modern antiseptics were unknown, the use of oil might serve as both a cleansing agent and dressing material to prevent infection while promoting repair. The instructions reflect an understanding that
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	When necessary care is applied to that piece of flesh causing it (referring possibly to inflammation or another condition), do so with oil, and tend carefully where needed on the body part
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	When necessary care is applied to that piece of flesh causing there (implying an area on the body where a condition may be present), do so with oil; if not, repeat lancinations over what has been broken in those places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	When acute pain requires medicine or treatment at a place for cauterization,
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	May you carefully apply antiseptic salve from a burning focus of purulent exudate (presumably referring to an infection or abscess).
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And there you already have its urgent treatment within medicine and take it when the patient has an onset of symptoms.
Capitol .liii.	Given that there is no accompanying text for "Capitol .
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	From cautery of the joints and other similar body parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Movements frequently occurring in the malady parts of the body that cause a fall to the foot; and it is their second type of treatment using cupping (focused on areas with water accumulation, such as legs) or cauterization at these spots.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	May the pointed cautery be where fire is kindled for pain relief that resembles suffering akin to torment; it will act as iron according to the quantity containing all divisions of parts and subtle grooves:
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Place that flame on the handle of the cautery, and turn your hand as you guide it along the key within which the cautery reaches the depth of the key.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Lay that in for three days until menstruation begins.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Return care is given where raw meat (tissue) has been placed inside until it heals.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If it is not converted (the treatment has not begun), and you continuously apply heat on the surface of the body, primarily in the thighs and feet; while holding a cup of water or iron rod/vulgar hammer with your hand, placing that over the keyhole. Then take this small quantity from the bottom part of the vessel (cup); place it under your palm, rotate as much as you can with your body movements; thus compressing what's in your hands and narrow down to a point on the lock/keyhole before excess water drips out due to pressure by hand. Wait for just enough time until moisture comes from this tap (small hole), which is caused by biting of liquid, approximately an hour duration. Afterward, remove that amount; if necessary adjustments are needed because parts have been moved forward/backward on the lock's pinion due to pressure applied with hands during treatment procedure.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And when it is necessary for others to enter through their mouths into all of these parts that are in the body, then do so with caution and care over everything they put inside.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And for those pus that are removed from the nodes by means of these ointments, which the flesh takes in (i.e., absorbs into itself), care must be taken to ensure their removal entirely.
Capitol .liiii.	Given that there is no text following "Capitol .liiii.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	In this translation, I've taken a guess based on the context provided and common medical terminology from medieval
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When trembling occurs in the nerves or due to fever as if from chills, it is necessary that you perform four kinds of cauterization: one on each intervertebral disc between any two vertebrae; another upon their hands and abdomen with caustic substances like olives.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	When the shaking of it stops and hastens the recovery from illness,
Capitol .lv.	The provided text appears to be from an old medical treatise with phr
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Regarding the burning treatment of flesh wounds on the body, it translates into English as: "Concerning the caustic inter
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there are expelled pus-filled lesions on the body caused by decaying large materials within it; thus, they seek a remedy to cover up these abscesses with mint leaves beneath and caustic treatment either at the focus where heat is directed or in areas of longstanding erosion—or cauterization near bones.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	Here are the translations line by line:
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	Whenever there is pain that needs to be expelled through pus drainage, perform an operation on the bladder.
Capitol lvi.	Given that "Capitol LVI" is an abbreviation
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	For the treatment of breathing problems caused by a wound through surgical incision with a scalpel (or perhaps "arcsidia," which could be interpreted as some form of cutting instrument used during an operation). The sentence suggests that
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	When troops avoid the breath caused by an incision made with a scalpel (interpreted as "arceria"), you must either perform further incisions on your patient or use cauterization instruments for their limb(s), and then it becomes difficult to restore that. The sentence advises healthcare providers, likely medieval barbers-surgeies of the time who were trained both in healing (as physicians) and surgical procedures (often associated with soldiers due to battlefield injuries): if they do not immediately treat an open wound which interrupts breathing ("fluex"), it is challenging, perhaps even unfeasible,
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore when you apply heat to the patient's chest where their breathing is affected by an injury from a surgical instrument like scalpels (referred here as "arceria"), place your hand over that spot until the wound-induced difficulty in breath ("fluex") ceases and does not resume. The guidance suggests maintaining contact with the healing site to ensure recovery, prevent complications such as pus formation or airway obstruction (often associated with untreated chest injuries), especially after heat application which is believed at this time in history to promote blood flow and possibly aid wound repair by stimulating circulation ("motas veguadas" implies ongoing care, "endic estrenh aquel motas") until the breathing difficulty resolves. This line of treatment aligns with
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Return breath or warmth in the focus using few and substantial caulters of olive oil, as commanded by certain movements inside which there are sparks of fire.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	If the sanction is expelled from the organ of the artery when you raise and remove the knife and cautery, then take another lashing device prepared for use in that area immediately; thus do not cease to apply force until the sanc (which refers here likely to a blood clot or similar obstruction) is restrained.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And if you do not burn away (cure) the nerves herein and purge from above other malevolence as well,
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	When the blood flow through arteries is constricted in these areas, it'se not possible to relieve them therein unless one of four methods are used: applying cautery where needed (or removing if already extracted), burning and restricting those limbs when they emerge from the patient so as not to expand the wound further; or using a ligature or wire for strong restraint, holding these areas firmly on the medicinal bandages that actively constrict blood flow.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	May that person who administers proper restriction apply a leather bandage and tightness to the clothes or position of causes due to burning sensations and resembling flesh; they should not comfort but rather restrain.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	May it happen that no doctor or medicine is present, and attend only to the place indicated upon those vessels where we have them now gathered, understanding fully how much of him lies within his body's lower part (the waist), beyond which he cannot be stretched; furthermore over the breastbone there shall not come any water-driven friction with its great agitation inside that encases him and puffs up his chest. And may it happen when such is necessary, either to cauterize or for medicinal purposes.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Comes the second division or section.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and piercing and suction, and of bleeding cures and their counterparts.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Alcuzcuz.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	Ja have we described in this first chapter all illnesses where a focus is needed and medicine burns, as well as the occasions and causes of such cases, and the instruments necessary for these specific forms; here I order the chapters on raising the head within the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And when this process is carried out in this place for the sake of that which they desire, so as to be drawn towards what has been asked by them.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	When you come upon blood flowing outward (suggestive of a wound), sonde, boy, learn that within this place it is the first stage of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	For the care that must be taken during this operation, where actions are carried out with great caution to ensure excretion of what is already there and preservation of life through aspiration from the vein or incision on the ulcer or abscess site, or extraction of worms/larvae and their likenesses.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	Whenever all these things accompany fear and trembling in their bodies, it means that they are close to death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E yeu amonesti voci(you are warning) you not to fall into where it rests, for some days (in a few days), they must use hands of men rubbing movements against illnesses(healers).
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	From them comes the one who understands their illness and is fearful of death due to the swift movement of that which causes it within themselves, as well as from its prolongation in itself, representing the illness for which they have reason to fear dying.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	From these humours causes you gain health and give life, but disease from them is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And so that you consent to this wherefrom the madness comes from among those who come see you; your caution must be greater than mere concealment and your greedless actions; do not suppose any cause for it but certain established science, by which you can refute such assumptions of yours, following a truly laudable sequence.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And in their healing for all of your illnesses we predict and indicate what has been converted into health on you; herein lies help with acquiring fame and memory, praiser and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh children, God grant you understanding and protection within yourself, for this is where it resides.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And order this chapter distinctly by chapters as they followed in the Chapter of Cautery for head treatment within the feet, so that you may attend to what is required from it and have need thereof.
Capitol primier.	Capital First or Principal Point
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the water cure that is contained within the heads of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You understand that this illness affects children frequently, especially when the newborn' extrudes its head from the womb.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	Some measures have been taken due to a harmful cause that is not clean.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	May you not see this illness in children but among all who have hernias and are close to death; through these I am witnessed doing my work on them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: E yeu e vist that an infant' extrinsically had a head filled with water (suggesting hydrocephalus), and its head was constantly swollen inside until it could not stand on its own due to the great size of its head, which may have also caused increased moisture within where breath comes from.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is added between the navel and bone or underneзу above the pubis, it will be placed there.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When the operation in that case is moisture between bone and flesh and swelling is slight, then cut at the neck of the head where a fissure exists on the chin, and its length extends two fingers within which the humidity runs; this is the form of spasm.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if moisture increases and ulceration becomes more severe, here are two types according to this practice:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the humidity is excessive in his body, it indicates that your joints have been opened wide and water gets squeezed when you press down on this area with pressure; here's what needs to be done:
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	When you cut into the head area at this location and create three openings according to this mannerism,
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And reduce the inflammation of the insides not to let any moisture remain therein, and strengthen cracks in sheets and linens; apply oil or vinegar on top after bathing during the daytime, secure with bandages and care for younglings tied up at their ankles using tents and ointments. Strengthen the head to achieve balance (i.dict), eat dry food from a little moisture within so that the body feels comfortable and heals.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and blood vessels of sanctus and moros (sweet/bitter) within them, for this fluid flow is related to the expulsion of moisture from these individuals.
Capitol .ii.	Capitol II.: (The translation for this line is not provided
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	From the incisions of these vessels where you apply pressure, it's called "hilssess." (This translation is an approximation as medieval medical terminology may not correspond directly to modern English or scientific terms and might also be subject to linguistic evolution.) Here we interpret 'apeladas h
Capitol segon.	Capitulum Secundum: Now, continuing on
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When suffering from joint aches or swelling of the hips or chest, ancient methods are used instead of this water-based remedy; thus begins therein our primary care approach at these two arteries' incisions. (This translation attempts to preserve as much meaning and context from the original text while translating into contemporary English.) The sentence appears to discuss alternative treatments for specific ailments, possibly referencing bloodletting or other historical medical practices that were thought effective before modern medicine established more evidence-based approaches. It indicates an emphasis on interventions directly at key arterial sites as the focal point of initial treatment in this context. Please note again that direct translations from medieval texts can
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	Thus when you wish to incise that part where the malady resides in its chest and flare up with scorching heat at said location—applying pressure on top of a hot cloth forsooth prevents arteries from surfacing, securing tightly across the patient's upper torso; also consider how to apply it around veins where these vessels might be visible near areas already targeted by incisions. (This translation endeavors to capture both meaning and technicality present within medieval medical texts concerning interventional techniques that involve direct contact with a patient’dict conditions.) The line instructs on the method of applying heat as an immediate measure, possibly for reducing swelling or relieving pain at specific points identified by incisions. It emphasizes careful consideration when dealing not just directly over arteries but also around veins—and it is expected that such delicate procedures would be performed only upon direct supervision ("en alcus homes"). Here we see the intertwining of practical medical techniques and localized patient care from historical texts, where immediate tactile response to ailments was critical. As with previous transl
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Return your password over the arch of foot and inscribe on each vertebra that enters into bone through mouth (presumably referring to oral examination), according to what is commanded by head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	If you wish, insert the screw tightly into the artery and divide that section for parts above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And when the length of the incision is two lengths adjusted, whenever any vein within it expands due to exertion and jumps frequently,
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	May you not find the arsenal (likely referring to tools or instruments) at the joints, then measure with your finger three fingers' width and apply pressure before entering the mouth/throat area.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	When the patient'supurgesfromthebloodisquantoitcontainsuncleanness,andnoexcessmaybeabsorbedbythemayverymuchaswelldependsonhowmuchurankethebodyhasofmaladyandsulceredhealthofthearteries.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Consider carefully the patient' extraneous matter (plagued), and if any remains on the bone, divide it off to prevent apendicitis abscess formation through incision.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return strength to the child with wool and lint from the cloth inside where it is being oiled for healing.
Capitol .iii.	In this translation attempt of an archaic medical text into English while
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	The phrase "Capitol III." in the context provided appears to refer to a specific point or section within a larger work, possibly related to temple architecture where arches are discussed and extracted for study
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When ancient acute or catarral conditions in temple structures arise due to moisture and the quality of stones within those sacred buildings, such as old foundations that resemble them likewise, these ailments are soothed by our medicinal herbs; thus we find ourselves suffering from these maladies necessitating extraction or cauterization—as demonstrated.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The pain of the operation and extraction from those humors which are in the sanctuaries; understand that arthritis is shown on your pulse as it appears therein—it remains hidden only when quickly moving homeward due to excess humor flowing within (the patient'thy body).
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If it is hidden from you, then the groin of the malady should be tightly bound with any cloth available; and rub or splash the location covered by the cloth with either an ashen fabric or hot water until signs of inflammation appear before you (i.thy).
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when you take this splint which is its form,
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And place your tongue in the area where it will enter into eructation; and put on a belt around you, extracting that from under the neck, discover those of the tunics which are there due to delay, up until completely removing them all at once.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	May it be that if the artery is subtle, wrap around that part of the body which constitutes its extremity and inscribe along those parts according to the quantity by means whereby their limbs are elongated and contracted, so as not to cause a flow of blood unless they have been properly incised.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	When it is necessary to reduce (return) the swelling of the womb into its cavity, and place your hand on the spot so that the uterus does not protrude further
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the artery is large, then you must place it in two places firmly down double fort of decay or along the tendons for long enough to stop bleeding and ensure that no further sanction flow occurs during wound consolidation.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	When excess is between two ligaments, and it may appear or occur at that time or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you wish, use the pointed cautery within the mouth of the cautery to enter where their external teeth have been cut (likely referring to dental extractions), and remain in that place for the work of this practitioner.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is better if the malady causes fever or an inflammatdicted condition; these are treatments for the final moist conditions and therefore they are more effective in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return the extraction of arteries that have lodged in the old crotch, and ensure their pulsing are placed decently on it; apply its healing is by means of medicinal ointments until the flesh and belly become healthy.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If while working on another day' extraneous flow of sanctus from the artery comes upwards, then immediately tighten that blood (sanctus), or apply a cautery to its location and strain your hand inside so as to restrict that blood.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If there is a cause of those things that are not present with you now, then rest your hands on the spot where his sanctity has become congealed, and apply pressure to this area until its inflammation subsides; at which point his strength returns as it was before.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	When the blood is drawn out from an artery for this purpose and you have placed two lances herein (which indicates that there are already in place at these locations where attempts will be made), delay until they come to the bone, so that it becomes elongated as much as possible through them; thus not solidified anywhere by means of this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is how the cauterization tool is used:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And it is the tightening of both cloaks examples.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	Even if the patient'se temperament is increased and becomes as sharp as two daggers on any part of the body affected by humors, we do not cut into the flesh hastily.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	So when there is any swelling and heat in those areas, the body's flesh has detached from itself due to excess warmth of the focus (implying a fever or inflammation).
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better in its entirety and has been provided with a light touch or padding.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	Where there are spaces between two skins wherein lies the quantity of the said body'thy mass.
Capitol quart.	Capital Quart (This could be referring to "The Capital
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Regarding the treatment of sharp and acute pain in joints caused by excess humors or imbalances within them, as described here:  
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the acidic humors accumulate there, they rest on those veins which are above the chest bone and do not cause any discomfort for healing in medicine; at times their face turns red as if ambulating like ants, and their hairs become frizzy due to tear fluid evaporation. Ancient apothecaries attend these patients diligently during this operation, trimming the scalp (as they would do with lice), scraping off dandruff caused by lacrimation; thus completing that healing intervention today.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	When you command the malady to draw out its own hairs from their place on the face and position your incision three grooves apart along the length of the forehead, it means:
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	If the length of the fissure is two fingers: one that stretches from the navel to the bridge of the nose at the forehead's location, and another according to a small movement in those parts where tears are formed (tears), this third portion belongs here.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	When you have reached the beginning of the arches where they meet at two points (likely referring to joints), lengthen your arm' extrusion from both jaws/lips continually.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	If in any joint there is three times as much space (i.dict), then...
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	If you have an applied sponge dressing or dry cloth on the areas where discharges come from, it is to absorb these secretions and keep them clean.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Whereby you join together two sharp ends of bones (which is how it looks like):
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	That it is from the departure of pillars into the second section or cavity.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Expose all of the neck where there is between two notches that are above the chest upon which fluid from the joint may move into the second notch.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Return the thorn or foreign object to its first chamber and use another tool with which you call a cautery, not cutting from either side.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	E pause the belly of that gout must have its flesh attached to the ribs; and press down on his chest where it enters into a split opening until he arrives at this crack, then detach all those veins which descend from the neck as hair.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May continuous flow of humor from the navel be maintained and directed into the split between one opening and another within itself.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	Put enough strength from the sanctified essence into circulation so as to release the clogged locations in the joint' extrications of fluid accumulation within the knee area.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Return the pause in any crack of skin wound, and place it over those grains at once on legs or back where they meet with water and oil, and watch that there is not an abscess formation developing.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	In the third day, you apply great heat from water or beeswax and others inside so that the humors are cured.
Capitol .v.	The given Latin inscription "Capitol .v." does not
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	This sentence appears to be in a mix of medieval medical terminology, possibly Old Occitan or another Romance language from that era with heavy Latin influence due to the vocabul0ary used ("cura" for care/healing, "lagramas" likely referring to p
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When arteries are clogged and circulation continues to occur within them, at times the humors of phlegm become overextended, leading to a situation where not only eyelids with ulcers but also hair can be affected by these pus-laden elements. This results in an acute pain around the head so intense and deep that it extends beyond even close proximity; hence we understand through this knowledge of accidents caused directly from blockages within the blood vessels stemming from their divisions, whereby both humors (body fluids) and catharsis/cleansing must be addressed promptly.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Remove all phlegm or moisture that has accumulated between the patient' extruded lips of either small cracks in the tongue, or wax on their linen fabric.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Return (or bring back) it upwards above the grains and oil, in such a way that there is not an abscess formation coming forth.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	When the pus has decreased and begins to liquefy in your nose (possibly indicating an abscess), take care that it does not spread further into flesh, for which you will apply honey made from wheat flour two parts each of barley flour four parts wax, mixing them together before applying the paste directly on these sores and administering as they occur naturally in body.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol VI. (Note: "VI." indicates Roman numer
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	When treating water that has entered the hands, here's an interpretation of your request in English line by line along with its translation into medieval medical terminology:
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The entire cause for water in the hands can be one of four kinds: It may either resemble iron or lead (fer and veyre), it could also involve plant matter such as chickpeas or broad beans (ceze or fava)—or alternatively, this might signify fluidity akin to mercury combined with vinegar and other substances related herein. Or else, it may stem from the miasma of an animal in question.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when blood flows out of the ear or appears similar to those causes that do not fit into it and stops in the ears, if you see the flow, then administer its removal, and make them stretch their bodies as necessary for expulsion, paying special attention to patients who have aversion towards treatment.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Apply pressure in the circulatory system of some wool or linen pads and extend the artery towards the parts above it; these movements are directed here due to this cause.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If not alleviated, then apply gentle manual extraction using the instruments referred to here as the act described thusly.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If it is a festering wound (hole or sore), then be; otherwise, administer its removal with small and gentle pricks of the needle under two folds at once.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	So if there is not an opening created by water, then make and insert the end of the artery into the rupture in the vein' extrinsicly with wax and oil softened for that only the tip of the artery protrudes without bursting open.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Returning outside with strong breath is when we've been warmed up by what we have discussed.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If there is no portal-opening in this mania (likely referring to an incision or other opening needed for treatment), then take hot air or warm instrument whereby the sleeves are drawn tightly, pause at the extremity of the ray (the direction along which a limb extends from the body's midline), and wrap snugly around that section paused.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	When you enter into the distress of the throat with ease and remove phlegm from it,
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if there is nothing left to account for all the causes we have discussed, then grasp what remains so that it may heal by cupping or convulsion.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	When the malady of such that you sanctioned in this way involves unclogging and extracting from within the vein called sephasica, along with its second segment according to the virtue'dictum (or guideline) here laid out, it is necessary for your hand to intervene between yours and convert any cracks present on the horny part into a small fissure there.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	When the figure of the moon'se crack reaches the stone (the treatment area), and if that stone is softened with an appropriate instrument at hand, then close the crack therewith as quickly as possible to heal it within this moment.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause is cholesteral in the gallbladder and inflates therein, then treatment and extraction will be administered; however, if you do not obey medical advice, apply a gentle heat under this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	e administers that which was extracted from his gall bladder, into this aperture (or wound) where it has been cut open.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	When you do not make it wet when you think that it has already been moistened by the aurelha'se vapor, and pause there in drops, so as to prevent those from leaking out or seeping underneath (their skin), for they are being drawn away here with us.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	May it enter the water where the malady uses sternutation to relieve its condition, and completes filling the earlobe with warm drops, and pours them over that part of the ear in which the water enters; if through this method relief is found, then be contented (that's "es bo," satisfied); otherwise, take fine pebbles or small stones according to its length, place it at the tip of your finger held by a patient who will insert and thrust one stone into their own earlobe as they hop on that particular piece placed there.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So that all water enters through the pelvis.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water rises at the gate and you take hold of paper or cloth, stretch one end over here where it will ignite the liver inside.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Even more medicinal oil and water are used in such a way that all the liquid is drained out through the extraction needle inserted from below.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	When an animal enters through that hole, if it is a small creature and appears to come out of the body itself (the womb), let them pull it out gently; otherwise, when it's from a large one causing pain in the uterus, then apply gentle extraction methods using forceps or hooks, removing its cause while being mindful that this is separate from all other causes found within the hole.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	May pain from the extraction of worms be born in the artery when you heal that which we have spoken about in terms of division and flow during distillation, provided you do not comfort your cure but rather observe the artery towards the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	So if there appears any cause of worms here, extract that with gentle hands or fingers, perhaps not needed as long; but in the absence of such a reason, take an old catheter drawn up and out below this way—this is how it'dict.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Here the delicate extremity enters into the armpit according to the quantity that may suffer from the malady; and apply suction therein with great force, making flowing movements until all worms are expelled through their holes (holes).
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	May you not obey my instructions, then you will bleed and seal in the channel of the catheter with wax as we have already done; administer these same remedies that were previously used against parasites within their treatment channels.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your infusion is where you dissolve these medical substances in the golden vessel, which is this very tool.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	E for that one of silver or lead is struck quickly in which there's a small splinter, and it is placed under the patient's arm.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	So it is necessary when they press in the continence of the catheter here at this place.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	If you wish, take the sponge and wrap it around the patient's limb gently, placing oil or honey (or any of these remedies from our medicine in a syringe – and that is where the needle goes) into the cavity of breathing, or juice/essence derived from some herbs; place the needle above and below this area so that as you compress it quickly inside, the oil (or essence) will be expelled within the cavity of respiration while making the melancholy feel its application.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	When it is infused into the artery, then it has already been cut and set on the small focus (probably referring to an incision or wound).
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	When you know what causes it that which will be drained in the arses (i.dict "arse" as an old English term for this area), and remember that poultices made from arse do not cause excessive cooling,
Capitol .vii.	The text provided appears to be instructions or observations made by medieval physicians regarding certain
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	In this line, it seems the writer is discussing some form of care related to "opalli," which might refer to small p
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Translation: Some unhappy children suck the marrow from their mothers' breasts without piercing them; this supplementation sometimes occurs in the bone just below where there is no clothing covering, and at other times it happens within the remaining parts of the body.  
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And when you place in the belly of him who is ill and cannot comprehend his clothing (meaning he may not understand or agree with medical treatment), it falls under major difficulties for recovery.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	When you pause the artery of malady at the solar region and observe it therein,
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	So when you see an obvious swelling under that subtle part of him which is his form,
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If in the limb where it is small and one part sharp while the other not, and the spleen has two flat liver sections that do not cause harm to the lung:
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the swelling is caused by fresh flesh in the arm or thigh of a patient, then cut it subtly and make an intense incision within wherein all the meat remains intact.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	If the stone (impacted calculus) is in the front of the urethra, then insert it gently under the subtle dragon and heat that little flame therein until you have melted it away; place it back into the meat of the urethra.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	Then if the arteries are filled with water that weakens them due to hardship or excessive workload, this constriction makes their functioning easier; be sure not to harm the nerves of your hands in doing so.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	May you ease the flow of phlegm if necessary, submerge sponge or cloth in water and place it over the forehead, using another remedy that restricts the flow of phlegm, which is mentioned in the text on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii. (This line does not provide enough context for
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Concerning the care that which comes to our eyelids." or more naturally translated: "Regarding eye lid healthcare/maintenance." This line
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Concerning the conditions that affect our eyelids; some of them are moist and others become dry." This line is discussing different possible states or ailments related to eye lids (palpebras), such as when they might be kept lubricated by natural secretions ("algunas veguadas son secos" suggesting occasional episodes
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	So that you can keep those which have been entrusted to or formed by us apart from their roots; and place your hand over the separated locations." This line suggests separating certain elements (possibly metaphorical, like objects of trust) away from where they originated ("their roots") with a deliberate placement using one's hands. It could be part of advice on how to handle or maintain something that has been entrusted into care and should not mix back in with its source materials (or
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If there is a flow of pain as it comes downwards, then treat those parts with subtle caution." Here the text advises on how to manage or alleviate localized discomfort (potentially related to health) when such sensations are descending in intensity. The recommendation involves gentle treatment ("sub
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best cautionary treatment is to return the insensitive ones and voluntarily returning of those that have been in motion once they are healed by such treatments; when handled at this focus point, these causes disappear without a trace." This passage discusses an ideal approach for treating certain issues which likely relate to pain or bodily functions ("razitz" could be referring to symptoms). The emphasis is on the use of specific remedies that restore sensation and prevent recurrence when applied correctly. Here, healing seems achievable through targeting focal points with particular treatments—implying a methodical approach
Capitol .ix.	The provided text appears to be from an old medical document discussing treatment
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	This line translates into English as follows: "Treatment of the great eyes that come upon the eyelids.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Constant irritation in the patient'se eyes any cause that is assembled to their greatness and hardening; due to its great size it calls for attention.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	When there is a thickening of moisture in the upper and lower parts of the eye, it appears here as though rain has accumulated above and below the eyes.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Thus, the operation on them is that you consider whether the greatness originates from water appearing under the eyelashes and being moist throughout the entire body; its cause is phlegm (or excess mucus).
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	So above that opening in the joint for ease of movement within which you prevent from slipping out and elevate it there as well as separate gently those parts apart one by one slowly until they are completely detached, including their tendons (their connecting tissues).
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If you are not dressed with the eye of little quantity and do not put it in or near the corner of your eyes to which extent there will be no notice due any reason.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the figure is large, then adjust it with suture; and take care that it heals properly.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	If it is little (of humor or essence), you will not suffer much from this remaining anger of him for the next four days.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the greatness declines at the parts of the eye lid flesh, then lift up and suspend it for an hour or so as you decide, take care to hold all that is taken out from there entirely; if by inspection the eyelid becomes elongated, note in no cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And when it begins (the condition), wash with salted water; and take care of the place where moisture is contained within, to heal what'sup already inside.
Capitol .x.	The provided text appears to be instructions or observations from an ancient medical treat
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Based on your description, it seems you're referring to a line in medieval Latin that pertains to eye care—specifically for the eyelid below (
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Translation: "The axcirnath is the grays that are formed in the undersides of their eyelids, mainly children suffer from these and need purification for them; hence they cannot look at sunlight because liquids collect on those areas."  
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	When you rub those grimaces on the cheeks all night long and during sleep; and with moistened brows that are already inflamed, which have been covered by a rash, as soon as you perceive it when they open their eyes, ten thousand accidents occur within them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	When you cut through the belly that leads into the kidneys, in these places where processes of splitting occur according to the form of white separation (likely referring to a surgical technique or anatomical observation),
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Thus extract those clothes in which you have wrapped the patient'thy thighs, and turn them between the right and left side inside where they are to be separated out.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	When you ensure that it does not penetrate through the crack, thus preventing the spine from reaching and damaging its nerves (and related structures), do this:
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	May if you do not see your patient in the commencement of the wound, may that small piece facilitate its passage and promote healing; adjust it within where bleeding occurs until stopped; lift up those bandages by their margins into water to cleanse them with agreement and rest periods for dressing changes.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	When you are walking and your salt dissolves and stops at the cavity of that crack, it means what is remaining moisture from there has been removed by movement.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Return that which is inside has been healed (or cured).
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	May it heal in place by applying a caustic local treatment; thereby the affected part may relax into recovery while being treated here.
Capitol .xi.	In translating this medieval medical text line by line into English while taking
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	From what little context is provided, it appears you are referring to a phrase in an archaic or foreign language related to touch
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the patient's lashes, their natural hair is adjusted quickly and ancient ways of maladies arise like persistent tears and soothing palpation on which we call due to contact with them (the touch), causing harm that calls for treatment through: or by cauterization using a sharp instrument; or as required in emergency medicine according to what has been stated previously about treatments ('capitol'); or it must be adjusted carefully and sutured internally, ensuring understanding of the internal structure (possibly referring to surgical intervention); or with cannulas if directed by them.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	So that you stop the flow of bile in the liver; take your left hand and place it over your eye socket (in its right side), if converted, then apply pressure with your hand; otherwise, insert a needle into where the fatty tissue has been placed by chance undernez above the eyebrow hairline— this is near the edge of the brow line where there are no hairs — and from here pull out the needle to convert it back towards below (the eye socket), thus converting that area.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	When in the part of the eye lid's edge where hair and sponge-like tear glands are inserted into the larger lacrimal (tearduct), it is necessary to pull out/extract them, along with fluff or drape particles under the eyelid. Then press on the eyelid lightly with a finger, holding their hands as well; they appear like mite's furry figure.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	Even if the figure according to how much eyelid opening there is, for these men have been differentiated by those who take in large quantities of moisture from under the eye lid as a means of softening it.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Return the scapula over the lines which you have drawn, and begin from the larger tear duct to the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	If your natural split in the hair is as large as that of the king'thy,
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Return the stitching of the wounds within three or four days, and take care as needed.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If you wish, stitch up the patient'dicts, and care for that which excretes and constricteth, whereupon their eyelids must be removed with the dressings of said wounds; perhaps suturing is better Then accordingly perform these ancient healing techniques.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	May it exert pressure on the thighs, and it is good work, not out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	Here comes another symptom in the head, and it is that elderly people have their eyelids lifted with three fingers as they separate and come together according to this manner.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	May if it is not possible to insert the needle, then take an iron with which one has threaded and place that in the figure'dict heat; also introduce another piece of thread into the main tear, a third into the smaller tears, adjusting them so as they are even among the fields (i.e., body parts), raising your hand to elevate this area where we have been advised together with you.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Return the lips of the patient's wound for stitching and treat that which is healed within therein.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If you develop an abscess or crack in your skin, clean that wound with wine and apply oil to it; then bandage the area.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And sometimes in some ways their ears are converted into a cover for that which we have said about blindness, so perhaps even then you may use bandages there as well.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	The following translation of each line from medieval medical Latin into English is as follows:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And when you turn the eyelid and divide the figure as I have described, applying cannulas or fine needles according to the length of the eyelid and the width of their lower jaw' extruding in proportion with these measurements:
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already inserted into the limbs of several parts, where you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is late, then break an egg and take care that its contents are healed inside where they belong.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When secured, the eyelid is lifted upwards, and the hair does not prickle.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	This is how you make (or perform) these types of cauterizations according to this method:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and there is no more length or width that may be nor must they measure in inches and minutes.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol .xii. (The given text does not contain enough information
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	When the hair is raised on the body, it stings when touched.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are not natural, hard and sharp, then in performing the operation it is necessary that you grasp with subtle force undernedependent but gentle control of a small leverage point below dependently controlled by delicate pressure from soft palms, ensuring all limbs movements remain precise.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	When the length of the fields is as much as a palm'dictorship in this medieval medical text suggests specific measurements, likely referring to assessing body parts or
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And if you wish for another subtle field of force beneath it briefly touches your hands and fingers. This suggests that the practitioner may use slight movements or energies in proximity to someone's body, particularly their extremities (hands and feet), potentially as a diagnostic technique within this context where 'forces' are being
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then hold the malady at your throat in place with its tongue under it; this ensures that your work will be acknowledged as a subtle and minor operation. The text implies maintaining control over certain bodily aspects (like holding an illness or condition), likely within some form of traditional healing practice, to validate the delicacy and small scale nature of what is being done – possibly acupuncture or moxibustion
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Then insert the needle into the prepared place on the skin that requires manipulation; make it pierce through to remove it from between the legs naturally, suggesting a technique where precise skill and timing are essential – possibly referring to acupuncture or cupping therapy within this historical context. The text describes an action of inserting something (likely for therapeutic purposes) with care into specific areas that demand expert handling while ensuring not to remove it too forcefully, which indicates a respectful and knowledgeable approach by the practitioner towards body manipulation in treatment settings.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then draw back and insert that into the space between them; these are two or three hairs at most. This line continues from earlier instructions regarding body manipulation within a traditional healing framework – potentially acupuncture, as mentioned previously in my previous translation: The practitioner is advised to be delicate when removing something (possibly needles) and reinser
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And pull your hand into that cavity where his pus has come out through the eye lid, naturally.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If it is necessary to draw back the sinews and they do not rise up on their own feet, then pull them towards the parts where you have previously applied wax (on that specific area), so that when drawn back by themselves, they will return above ground/surface.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	When that vision of the belly appears, and you gently rock it with your hand and throttle whatsoish as they twitch or clutch at their abdomen, loosen them for two to three days until the pus adheres to its proper place and forms healthy tissue.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If there is too little hair (fine fur), adjust a long one of the natural ones and raise it above so that it fits into place; then lift up that as well.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii.: This line appears incomplete or out of context as
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	This phrase seems to be from a medical text and translates into English roughly as: "Regarding the treatment that is found under the eyelid." Here's how it could translate line by line
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	Your translation attempts to convey the meaning of what appears as medical instructions or observations from an old Latin-influenced text:
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the reason for operating on them be that you cut through their conglomeration and separate their lips, pausing in water between which serves as a sheet of fabric under it, and bind those within so they may heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And when using the treatment for them that cause illness to return and worsen at any time without warning focus on healing these issues as quickly as possible.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use that which soothes the ailment when mixed with fenugreek and immersed in water where they boil their legumes or oil for purification (and thus liquefied), submerge it into this vessel herein mentioned, and heal through it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And your treasure for healing is that you pierce through each bone, so it does not solidify according to the manner of consumption.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation that we have described is not any correction of humoral imbalance that does not restore the shape of the affected area after heat has been applied from above.
Capitol .xiiii.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discussing
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	And when it occurs in the eye lid," is translated as: "Quand cela se produit dans les paupières."  
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This discharge that occurs in the eyelid is necessarily called blepharitis; and it has its own nature, either inherent or incidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	May it be caused by vermin or cracking or through caustic interventions, or other similar occurrences.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The way of the operation is that you take a needle in which makes double thread, and keep it on the flesh; making the thread pass from the right tear (lacrimal) into the left tear (lacrimal), until the thread reaches the extremities of the body.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Expose the body' extraneous parts below the belly and above it around the navel area, holding firm at this spot on the thigh bone (os tibiae).
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if you return the figure of the eyelid as it was before covering your eyes; otherwise take a sharp instrument and pause on that cut part thereof, then restore the eyelid shape with this tool, thus closing the cracks in the skin of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	When the extremities of their bones have cracks at two angles of the joints where they meet and enter (i.dict "entrar"), it is when these things come together, forming that figure (the shape or appearance) which results from them meeting in those places.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	This figure is Greek letters: the footpad (landa can be interpreted as a type of cushion or padding used in medieval medicine, possibly
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Place the meat there for as long as it takes to be thoroughly cooked through, which is when you see steam rising from under its lid (referring here possibly to a pot or dish where food might simmer). This indicates that one should wait until the heat has sufficiently processed and "cooked" the meal before considering it ready.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	If there is a tear or stitching (fracture) or if you need to use cautery, then cut only at the cracked area on the eyelid skin as previously indicated.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	When closing the gap between the upper jaw according as we have said before.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In summary of the discourse on gout treatment when it is removed or dissolved from operation, as prepared in its form of pills, that takes various shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The skilled craftsman prepares in each case for what is possible within that form, or even closer to it than necessary according to how much he finds appropriate during the operation and with the instruments used in major configurations.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of attachment of the eyelid (or) the conjunctiva or the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in men who have it pushed below their eyelid using the album of hue (the colored part of the eye), and is prevented from easy movement as well as natural functions, then insert outside its outer membrane with your finger or extend that area upwards or outwards.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	Here comes the sentence for translation: And if your eye is wounded and has an attachment that needs help, return it according to its natural shape so that all of the attachment heals completely.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	When you place your hand in salted water, or when the essence of juniper is distilled into the water,
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Here the sentence translates as: Place separation between the eyelid and the pupil of his eye, pause over the clouded lens in an album made of bovine horns, apply a third-day remedy for consolidative causes while he is being cured.
Capitol .xvi.	The provided text seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise possibly
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Based on the vocabuls and structures present, which seem to combine elements of Latin with Medieval European languages like Italian or Spanish (given that medieval medical texts were often written in these vernacdict),
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Translation: You understand that sweat is secreted in two ways; it can either be nervous and look like a delicate wax (nervous), or not nervous at all, looking like white ice chunks held together by pressure which when touched with force immediately falls apart leaving nothing behind.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both spices do not enter except through the greater tear duct, gradually covering the eye and preventing light and motion from entering.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	May the action in his head cause the humors to stop at his forehead and upwards along with your hands handling their hues, taking one ocular drop twice its size from a small piece of bark, applying it to each area below him respectively.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And if you intend to lead that limb inside again within it (the patient), then do so accordingly.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Here comes the text to translate line by line into English:
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And when some of the blood has been drawn out and collected in one hour or more with an iron dish (the scabbard), here is what we call this form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	E safeguard yourself so that you do not touch the corneal membrane and cause it breakage; ensure your pupil is pierced through.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the wormwood is not numb and you cannot insert the needle there or if it's in that little spot, this kind of wormseed cures with medicine, and heals even when used as directed within its division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you wish to separate that part, work the hip of the humerus and place a soft pad undernethy subtly shaped like an inflated football according to this method.
am subtilitat.	and subtlety is employed/used here or in this context.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	and if that is thin and confined and takes on the essence of cold or sharp pain in your sinister foot (left side), dissolve it within today'thy hour; pour into its womb both day-time fire water and saltwater holy oil, doing so before tomorrow.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the line to translate: E propria ità sobre quell' operazione che resta in acqua quella è espressa da lu (all of which is expressed by him), and when you lay that on, then leave her there until heals within the wound.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Return your operation over that which is within reason for healing.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The semen of the crying flesh, if it enters through the hole in great harm to one'se health, shall be stopped for an hour; and examine that which has entered into such a part, not exceed inspection time lest you cause more fluid discharge.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	When it is necessary to draw fluid from the teary eye chasm and infused with healing substances, do so until they are healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol .xvii.: This line appears to be referencing a specific chapter or
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	From the insight of allopathic and from where it was born, flesh adjusted on meat: This line appears to be an attempt at translating medieval medical terminology into English but is somewhat nonsensical due to archaic phrasing or potential translation errors. Here's a more coher
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	From some of the veins in our flesh comes squeezed meat, and it is over-expanded within that covers the pupil; or properly applied upon the lids (eyelids), whereby we press down with these parts divided before us into sections akin to balusters. This line describes an outdated medical procedure related to eye treatment but lacks clarity in modern terms:
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	May the operation in him be that his bladder stops at the belly; and with the blood of that man take all the meat convenient for it, using a cupping or chestnut forceps; and bind up the flesh inside so that everything is finished by the suture, guarding against cutting off what you need for your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And your finger is where you insert those or small knives that collect excrement inside of it, according to what we recommend in this chapter regarding its shape and size.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	So when your flesh is healed and completely restored, then the salt paste spreads over that area where it was wounded, dripping down as powder or resembling medicinal ingredients on top of which there'd be a blanket within to ensure its secure bandaging.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If there is any cause of lameness and the limb senoorateship cures by means that come to relieve itching, apply those same measures as needed until relief for this itch comes from what was used in treatment within which healing has taken place; similarly, afterward, hold onto these substances while they are still effective on the flesh adjusted wherein discomfort is felt.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Even if you remove the entire cure for hernia completely by force or accidental means with iron tools, and do not put your hand inside any of these operations while observing that this member is suffering from it.
Capitol .xviii.	The provided lines seem like they are trying to convey ideas related to medieval medical practices for tre
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	În traducerea în limba engleză, propozția corecta ar sarebbe: "Collect the se
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	 În traducere în limba engleză ar avea această propozitie: "Gather the shells which are hardened on the body and forbade to operate with them in your hand, developing the wound over days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Then it is necessary for you to consider if the patient in which he feels strong and has nothing else wrong with him apart from this condition; then take that very sick person away.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	When you command the humors to stop their flow in the vein, and place it there for one or two ounces according to your judgment; let that first volume be doubled as per this manner.
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	And thus with cuts made in a second manner according to this form...
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And bind those veins with threads of fineness and subtlety, washing them off hour by hour until they are no longer swollen from the humors within, as long as you wait for these veins to become clear again.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	Here is the line-by-line translation of the medieval medical text:
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	When you have completed it all, then pour wine or water through the chalice to purify what has accumulated there from venomous humors within (the sick person).
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	May it not be within your power to collect all of it at that time; and if so, then apply the fluid that yields its pain from you, and let him go through air for days until he is sedated by the pain and secured against absorption with a plaster cast.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	Once more over him when his mother's illness has entered and healed,
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is how these instruments are used:
Capitol .xix.	Given that "Capitol" is not an actual text but rather appears
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	The phrase "de reduccio de arizati al nas" in Latin-based languages can be interpreted as the
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you care for arising or acute inflammation after its description and is not healed spontaneously, it's not left in the body but rather through surgical intervention; remove entirely the moisture that exists within where they place an instrument (presumably a tool used by physicians at the time).
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when you discover the bone and it has times been in decay or damage, then this is its form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is a sharp head, and its metal consists of iron or alumina for fine points (to be taken in this form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And raise that over the place where bone has been crushed, and turn it around between the thighs, pressing your small hand in gradually until you know that this crushing is worn off.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	When there are some dry courses (referring possibly to thirst or dehydration), and restore the place where causes from evaporation and tightness reside.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So that location is consolidated and good flesh has grown in its place, free from disease and abscess for forty days, without renewal of wound or scabbing occurring therein; when you know this, it means healing has occurred.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	If not, it is in no way within the body but to reduce the crack to its shape of the nose; according to this methodology: and when you discover two metals or acute medicine (presumably referring to surgical instruments made from metal like scalpels or other sharp tools used for medical purposes), upon finding them, take it as such form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	That external iron is trilateral-shaped and its handle inside the extension becomes worn with use.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And place your hand over the bone, and that part of it belonging to the lacrimal; extend a portion of your arm along the neck (or throat), turn around such way that this area is covered with regards to where fluids may enter into the body through weaknesses in their defenses when they are taken away.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	So after they have done this, then restore the place with dry and purgative medicines as soon as you enter.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	So when the flesh and location are durable/tightened together, then return the substance that flowed into those parts back to the abdomen; thus a ligation is placed over the swolthy area.
Capitol .xx.	CAPITOL XX. (This line seems like an identifier or
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Reducción de la eminencia del huele" appears to be a phrase in medieval Latin, which may refer to the
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the humors are in their entirety and not corrupted nor diminished within them, cover that which is excessive moisture to restore balance; then apply pressure over where there has been a scarification on bone structure – this will be done for good health reasons—and restrain movement upon areas covered by liniment made from acacia gum and aloe, along with seed essences (possibly sesame or similar) and scrapings of purple clay; furthermore apply strength through massage to the affected limb that contains grains.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The following is the line by line translation of the medieval medical treatise:
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	According to what is required for each other according to the quantity that has been needed, place them on top of one another accordingly.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If during intercourse it is softened (the ligaments), then a movement that causes pain must be identified.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	When you secure (tighten) the ligament today and yesterday as we have discussed,
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the wound has been reduced already, then that is good; otherwise, continue with plaster on the bones and joints, as well as injections inside where it may heal.
Capitol .xxi.	The provided line "Capitol .xxi." does not contain enough context
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	From the depth of the venerable layer of the uveal tract, we can translate this as follows:
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When the covering of the eye is disrupted, it becomes prominent and proceeds outside through the lids like a spearhead, and as for water to be inserted again into this place, so that you intervene with an instrument at its location on either side of the juncture below, placing another tool'0in which has doubled from where tears come out (lacrimatory), making it penetrate and seal after your disposition; fix one in the spot of the doubly formed tear duct, lift that part with water at this point within its channeling motion.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Return and fix the wound on the warm flesh immersed in alum and wine, letting your hand enter where threads are threaded through it.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	When proper care is given to this worm that sustains what dwells inside, it contributes to healing of the contained matter within.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And some days gather the entire body within the circle of the drape tightly adjusted under the chest and perforate through the subtle sinew beneath which fluid ascends to the place of lodgment in the womb, downward descending into it so quickly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Return strength within so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any context or text related
De curacio de alconati.	The phrase "de curacio de alconati" appears in a similar medieval medical voc
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness, referred to as "alconatia," is not simply any disease; rather, it'mistakenly refers to an affliction that resembles drowning and seems different in nature from what might be expected of such symptoms. It appears this condition was perhaps thought to involve some aspect or confusion related to water (possibly through wetness on the skin) without actually being literal submersion into a body of
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	This statement seems to describe an unusual practice for dealing with the 'alconatia,' wherein one must pour water over a device (possibly some form of medical apparatus or bathing aid) and then press their own head onto both hands, dry it off completely so that no moisture remains, effectively sealing away any remaining dampness. By doing this meticulously with each hand while observing the parts for signs of illness returning (possibly as a symptomatic relapse), they believe to prevent further complications and keep out drafts or 'air,' which might worsen their condition, allowing them instead only light ('lum') exposure. Here's an attempt at translation:
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not descend into urine, you understand that there is water (i.dict). This likely refers to a medical context where if certain symptoms or fluids do not appear
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If it is not descended into the urine, you understand that there is water within us; now attend to these waters and apply a delicate sponge underneath this area in contact with our skin or overlapping where clothes meet (covering eye sockets), ensuring continuation of moisture for conjunctiva's condition inside the cornea, provided that it is extracted/removed.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then when you have poured out the infusion in which honey and water were mixed, containing fennel and honey previously boiled together:
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Return its care is for other causes within which it heals itself.
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol xxii.: (The translation could be context-dependent as there
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	From the treatment of water descend from the bladder." This sentence seems to convey a perspective, possibly medical or alchemical in nature, suggesting that
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have the spices of water in division and decide to pierce through it as they declare according to health." This sentence implies that someone has divided some aspect related to "water," possibly its components or properties associated with a medical condition, based on their assessment (or opinion) about what is best for one's health. Here the action of dividing ("diviso") and piercing through ("perforar"), along with reference
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Hence you create a space between your thighs over an object and hold the bladder as it is necessary for strictness." This sentence suggests that there's some form of medical procedure or treatment being performed where creating a specific position (perhaps using objects to maintain pressure) helps in retaining control ("stringent") over, likely referring back to holding something tightly related to patient care—possibly the
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Apply pressure with your hand on the eyelid of their bladder if it's in that area (the right side); or to its elbow if left-side." The sentence seems directed towards someone who is likely performing a manual technique as part of an examination, treatment, or understanding patient conditions. Depending on which side ("senestra" for the right and "deyxtre" for the left) the bladder (possibly referring to some organ related therapy in medieval medical contexts where terminology differs from modern standards), pressure should be applied accordingly with one'thy hand – either directly
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	Apply pressure with your right hand at the beginning [of an action]; if it's on the side (right), or apply to its left side if upward." Here, a guideline is given for where and how to commence applying some form of physical manipulation – by referring back to which direction ("senestre" meaning "left," "deyxtre" indicating "upwards") an organism's bl
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Return the limb extremity above the crown due to the heaviness of the head on the chest portion from where tears come out (lacrimal), and place your hand under it, holding its appendages tightly there.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And insert into the patient' extranchyma and feel that it has already been caused by external invasion or intervention.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Return rest if needed; therefore, when the water descends, take a pause until there is no risk of it being wet again.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is secured and does not descend further, then extract the ease easily with your hand, twist that part around itself a few times, and dissolve in water a small piece of clear crystal salt mixed with lava (a type of clay), and place this mixture on the wound to stop bleeding; apply pressure externally using cloth soaked in rosemary oil and egg white/albumen bandage smeared with water.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May we of our time place ourselves over that which has been cooked in cow' extrudate (or bovine product).
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	If you do not obey your doctor'sin the inside of the joint – for these are those to which hardness belongs in men – then bind his wrist with a band, as this is called.
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And thus he pierces that part of the joint, and does not end his hand in the wound area, nor makes a path towards the subtlest location below.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And return (or bring back) the intestine or hernia into its cavity; and place your hand over the area so that the intestine does
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And receive the praise of your work; let it be a comfortable bed in which you rest on both shoulders within dark closeness, and allow no movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And so he rests in the nature of him that water is his sustenance and does not make his head depart from the third or left side of his entire body.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	Whenever it is according to its disposition enter into the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Return that which has fallen into darkness in that night and extract the fluid with some force; examine for possible causes, then bring back the sinews to daytime (at noon).
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	Not when you make an application of medicine during healing or shortly after its preparation, then apply it properly (with the appropriate infusion).
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	When you separate water from above for a long and strong gaze, it is said that the body loses its vital fluid (or essence). Here translates to: When they part ways with the waters above through prolonged intense observation, people believe the body expels or depletes its essential fluids.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If you apply a poultice for an ulcer and cover it with moisture today, then correct that which yields to the applied fluid.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Absolve the patient'dict sight and place your hand over their face for several days thereafter, as they will continue to languish in darkness even then.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	Return its gait from that place significantly and discuss about its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	When you understand that a student may need some guidance during the operation, and when you yourself are skilled in performing it,
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has already come to us from those of them who are skilled in art, and they say that a fire was set up at the place where water had been sucked out through the hole.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	May even though no water has been seen on our land which once had it abundantly, nor have we witnessed any among the free men of ancient times who knew how to procure it nowadsday, and it is possible that such knowledge could still exist today.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of the medicinal substances used on that, which he does not know about.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	These are stones of earth or iron by nature, and these protrude beyond their subtlety-determined triangle shape, taking on the form as such.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol .xxiv.: (The exact meaning of this Latin abbreviation
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	From the careless handling of meat, nothing is left in the nose." This line suggests that without proper attention or consideration when
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose various pains are born from these adjusted carrion pieces for which there is no cause leading to scorpions or polyps, it is called Polypus; this malady bears a resemblance to that of such creatures depicted." Here, medieval texts often connected nasal discomfort and physical symptoms with curses or supernatural causes. The reference seems almost like an allegorical representation linking the suffering from conditions in the nose (like polyps) to mythological entities ("scorpions" being arachnids known for their sting), emphasizing a belief that health issues could be interpreted as punishment rather than purely medical phenomena, which would nowadlausely require clinical
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from the meat comes blackened (or dark) substance and here it is that flesh should not be of a brownish hue." This line further delves into concerns about dietary sources contributing to ill health, implying an association between consuming certain types of decayed or discolored foods ("blackening" suggests spoilage
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in that which you place within your body (presumably referring to the consumed meat), if it is not fraudulent or blackened and rotting flesh, then open a hole between your thighs so as to expose them both for sunlight exposure. Feed their extremities with these meats." This instruction from medieval medical literature provides guidance on how one might attempt self-treatment by using the body’s natural processes (like basking in sunlight and feeding oneself) rather than relying solely on external interventions, which aligns with humoral theories prevalent at that time. This suggests an approach where exposure to light is believed beneficial for health—a concept somewhat
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Extract that from the parts above where it is understood as a thin bone under which all the flesh remains; if there'dict any cause of loss in here, then extract water using one of the subtle instruments available to facilitate addressing this possible reason for detachment within.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If you have the leather or accidental boil for a sear tool ready, then stop what comes from within; and if it's an abscess of malign nature, apply pressure to where flesh has separated and all cavities are present.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	In this line of text from the medieval medical treatise, here is the translation into English word by word and then as an understandable whole sentence:
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	May it be that your nose is opened and moisture goes into the mouth, then you will know that healing has already begun.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture does not penetrate secondly that covers, you will understand that within this body there is no flesh in the feet where it has not reached by absorption.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	So when you encounter any obstruction in the area to which faithful devotion has been directed by him who is ill, and his semen accumulates within it (indicating an issue related to ejaculation or menstruation), count carefully how much there is between each use of that person's body part—be it a nosebleed, throat discharge, etc.—and make sure the obstruction has been removed.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	Put that odor into it so it can enter the nasal passages and sit on its goiter, which causes discomfort for children in school, becoming the reason I am doing this.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return both extremities of the foot, one that appears above the nose and another that protrudes into the mouth, manage with a knife for meat preparation used in these cases within the feet; this allows you to know when the flesh is already inside the fetus.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Return the metal, and pause at the nose for a period of three days or more until all that has been expelled from the body is gone (refers to bloodletting).
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	In the light of day when it is needed (to intervene), place in your nose an iron tube for as many days until healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	May it be that there is a cure sought after all this time using such means.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	This is how the tool used for bleeding in bed is made, where oils and medicines are extracted from it.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	E from silver or lead (which is like a small torch), it looks similar to the cover of an urn and resembles flesh as if with a little crown:
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	If you wish, make a closed cane available with the catheter maker and its flat surface shown; hold it in your hand where these gloves rest upon when draining fluids or causes related to their secretion from within them.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	Here are the translations for each line:
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol XXV. (The Roman numeral "XXV" indicates
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	It seems you've provided a line of text that may not be correctly written in English or could potentially contain non-standard terminology, possibly from
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	The line appears to be a mix of different languages and possibly an attempt at translating medical terminology related to sinuses from potentially Old or Middle Latin into English, which is not straightforward due to the non-standard phrasing:
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	Through which means you have inserted it into his body for observation of its appearance and effects, taking everything that occurs from there.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Return your hand or caustic medicine over the location where it is present, which burns therein (implying that placing one'thy hand with heat from a burning substance like sulfur can alleviate joint pain caused by cold humors).
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	May it be late for your insight to enter, consider if it is hardened, dark in color and with little feeling; do not touch that iron which has been applied to the skull—it moves on its own accord towards you whenever you inspect this fracture deeply out of malice directed at what has already occurred upon that very head.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the ulcer is of fresh blood and not of cold color, and it seems possible to insert an instrument into all of that, withdraw the purulent matter causing fear in the elderly patient'thy mind, and cleanse with water wherewith you wash your hands for healing.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capitol .xxvi. (This line appears incomplete or potentially non-
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	The seam of the nose and lips, as well as the jaw when continuity is lost due to dirt or appearance (perhaps implying that unsightly marks can appear in these areas). Translated line by line:  
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	When you discover a continuity of bone in one of these joints, do not confer with her during that procedure unless it is an acute case.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	So then, when any cause for these comes to you which considers it as fresh moisture within the sick person'se body and where adjusts their lips (mouth) on that wetness with suture, take care of what is inside so that it may heal.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	If the lips of continuity (i.dict 'mouth') are already separated and any pain is healthy thus far, then cover each fractured part within that which escapes illness.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	May the use of stitching be that you add continuity thread or needles together with what we have already tied in the abdominal suture, or attach continuous stitches using your fingers along with mine.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol .xxvii.: (This line likely refers to an official or formal
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	The provided text seems to be in a mix of modern and archaic Spanish, with some words that could potentially belong to Latin-influenced medical or legal discourse due to the reference "partes dentales" (teeth parts) which connects it
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	The text translates to English as follows: "Persistent motions that occur in the teeth parts of one's lips resemble hard butter chunks and some have roots while others are major." In a more structured translation for clarity, we can say:
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	So that you convert each lip and fend within those hardened parts of the whole body, expand your abscesses in their respective locations where it has entered inside him/her, wash with water agreed upon for treatment therein (inside), and cleanse and cure the location from which effusion occurs.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii. (This line seems like it might be a section
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	From the adjustment of flesh within the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great pain of the compressed flesh that I previously touched upon now causes suspension or temporary removal thereof; thus you must hold it until its reason is known and let disease flow naturally, allowing healing to occur internally and externally (the illness).
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Return your hand over the place where three grains of dust or other dry cathartics have settled, or on their own expulsion:
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	If that flesh returns, you will subsequently inspect it immediately and cauterize it; thus the cautery shall not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol .xxix. (Note: Without additional context or understanding of
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Based on your text, which seems like an attempt at Spanish mixed with Latin-based words and phrases
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When scraping the surface of teeth and gums, there are sharp pricks or pains; some discomforts may be citric (lemon-like) in taste within which decay enters through the mouth'thy gingiva is affected and they feel like toothaches.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And so when you open the space between your thighs and pause at the top of your chest in line with it, bite on those teeth where those sharp edges appear, caused by blackness and citrinitas within which no cause can break through unharmed, these are due to blackness and citric acidity as well as other things that have been sanctified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	So if you find yourself in that state of excess within the digestive reason, be; and otherwise, then iterate the digestive reason on those very days until they expel themselves when it is your wish to do so at this time or another day.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	Be aware that teeth have required different types and shapes of instruments as per your operation'se readiness.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	Through which the razor is held where the tooth resides as part of other forms, and these teeth-like shapes must be prepared beforehand so that they may come next.
Capitol .xxx.	Given that "Capitol" is not an extract from any
D’eradicacio de dentz.	The phrase you've provided, "d’eradicacio de dentz," seems to be in
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Eradication of pain from the tooth that occurs throughout day and night without any cause for delay; there is no reason interrupting care when it has been fully treated, as what lies within justifies its use in treatment.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	May cover when the thigh is broken to eliminate whatsodictate which of them hurts, that regularly causes pain in these joints and ceases their suffering as long as the diseased and painful thigh has been eradicated; now we have seen this through surgery by barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, when you must confirm what is the painful tooth and know its nature, ensure that it dissolves in the dental socket where some movement occurs within, allowing gradual reduction of these teeth or small fragments therein until they are completely out (or extracted), holding your hand undernethy.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if there is no gaping wound, take one of those instruments and apply it here for ease in the removal so that he may eat again during his recovery.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	May it be that if the tooth is dislocated or decayed, then do with a cloth what you are completing and tighten that limb' extramundly finely so as not to be displaced during your constriction on that extremity.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And wash out her mouth with water or saltwater for cleansing.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If fluid flows down due to standing for a long time, do so slowly while standing, and if you don't wipe off that discharge from the ground, then burn it with cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and delicate tools are those through which pain is muffled in each part removed from lengthy or narrowed treatment areas, by hand movement to prevent them from becoming doubled up when performing these procedures.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	When you enter with heavy movements that when they are done should not be doubled and stretched out too far from the body.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xxxi.	The text provided appears to be in Middle Latin or possibly Old Spanish with some influence
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Translation of the given medieval medical treatise line into English:
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need the eradication of that which is causing a grinding in your jawbone, then rest upon the spot where it meets at the border for one or two days until the location softens; and apply pain relief ointments or take out those pieces from which teeth are assembled on the beak of a cuckoo bird or quail'dictor:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The provided text is a blend of various languages and old medical terminology, reminiscing elements from medieval times when Latin heavily influenced medicine in Europe alongside regional dialects like Italian or Spanish. Here's the line by line translation:
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If you do not obey me in the use of these forceps or tweezers, then cover your hand over the ridge and remove all flesh with this tool by which it is held as a small lever. (Here refers to "forceps" / tweezers)
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	E for a small extreme body part and it is not beginning to break apart.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the patient has a swolthy (possibly 'tumultuous' or similar for medieval context) exit, they are; otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments whose shapes include at least one bulky form such as that of the first mentioned instrument which is triangular and external:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second tool is that it's trilaterated and has a subtle touch for precision.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And here you will help with this tool that has two levers as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and use other instruments that we have prepared for incising the teeth; it is well-made with this tool assembled from one hundred parts and its form is thus.
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the twisted or shortened limb extremity that is any size and not for breaking it apart:
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you understand that these tools of teeth motion are similar in form and likeness to the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the skilled and subtle artisan of medicine understand what each fluid means in terms of operation and various illnesses; these are diseases for which ancient physicians neither recognized nor provided appropriate instruments due to diverse forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the jawbone or other bones in the mouth are fractured, or if they have been poked/pierced, then treat them on that spot where it is convenient for you to use your instruments and forceps which we mentioned earlier in extracting teeth roots. Herein lies how this should be done:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And whether there is any swelling gradually, and if it' extruded or protrudes through that all its bones are formed outwards—and restore the place with appropriate medicine;
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a fracture in the bone, then treat that portion of the fracture and its darkness (implying blackening or injury), and heal it within so that it becomes healthy again.
Capitol .xxxii.	Given that this text is in a medieval medical context with influences from Latin
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	When it comes to the care of teeth, matters above all else concerning health and well-be0rthy. (This translation attempts to capture the essence
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are considered essential not only for their natural form but especially in women and particularly on the honorable lips—therefore consider: if there is no other tooth involved where a separation or thread of wax might be used, then it's clear that this principle applies; perhaps because they do belong to another tooth, at which point you should engage them with an instrument shaped as such (resembling pork and made from Indian steel file); thus indicating the necessity for intervention.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your tongue is where you insert that into the teeth for several days until they stop hurting and are not aggragot by other teeth's pain.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	If there is an emergence of steam from the lithotomy (surgical procedure for stone removal), then apply the Indian steel chisel that this instrument represents.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And whether it'sup from iron of India or by means herein described; and where points are made with a razor-like tool in small slices over several days for ease, so that no other teeth will be ground down nor suffer decay.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Return those lines back into the womb (belly), and have them aligned at the hips; this is where their tendons should be positioned.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If there is damage where a part has been broken and the tongue speaks about it (i.e., shows signs of pain or difficulty), then you must restrain that which was sharp from causing further harm, ensuring both the tongue does not worsen its condition nor alter speech.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Given that there is no accompanying text for "Capitol .
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	From the fragments provided, it appears we have a line from what might be an old or medieval medical context discussing perhaps treatments involving metal instruments:
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When you have pain in the teeth before convulsion and removal due to percussion or extraction, and your medicine has cured that affliction with stoppages of bile flow (gallstones), there is no need for further treatment; hence why it won'thy occur again on those joints tightened by iron willpower versus silver resolve – as the latter metal does not change over time.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And when the foot is so subtle and curved according as it may enter between the teeth; how does one perform recovery? Grasp the toe, take double its length under healthy adjacent teeth, stretch further where there are crooked parts of the toe or if a stone (impact) has entered, until reaching the tooth in the other half.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And return their bowels (or intestines) into the cavity of where it began, and hold your hand tightly to ease them gently in that they do not become bloated or swolgy.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	When your bandage is where you need strength for keeping the teeth of the tongs from escaping,
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	When that liquid is poured down with Roman style,
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it becomes loose or prolapses (ruptured), hold onto that which is loosened in such a manner throughout all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is how the teeth and straightness of healthy as well as diseased (dental) jaws are bound together sometimes:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When one returns the bone or sets it with any of those in their locations at once and they are grown again as when we heal them together, that is what should be done to mend fractures quickly.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	Not until there is an adept craftsperson and wise person does it happen so.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capitol .xxxiv. (The provided text does not contain enough context
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	From the chord through which it is in the tongue and forbids speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament through which the tongue occasionally moves or is naturally attached to it, this can either be its own due to habitual motion, or an injury caused by crawling creatures that have already solidified their presence.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The operation in him is to gargle the malady'dictor's mouth; his tongue exists within the throat, and raise its tongue, applying pressure on that particular nerve as per which it will be relieved from speaking (the disease).
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	May there be any hardness or swelling in that area, and it is for consolidation of pus within the limits you have divided with your incision and wherein has been removed its adhesion; then give a poultice and divide this part accordingly.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And make sure there is not a crack in the skin of the body here, and separate acurella (a type of cautery) and urine flow from sanctum (the womb).
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	May you cool down the inflammation fluid that has been sitting on the glass three times; may it be blood if this is so, then bleed out the location with a sharp instrument to prevent further accumulation of phlegm which will bring relief.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Return that healer for other causes within which it should be cured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any textual content related
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	From removing a ranula quickly after the tongue has been taken out, it suggests an urgent or immediate medical procedure where both removal of the
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some acid drops immediately after the tongue is extracted are assembled by nature and prevent it from performing its normal functions, becoming magnified when they enter inside the mouth. This medieval medical treatise indicates a belief that certain substances (perhaps unsuitable medications or irritants) could interfpective with healing processes if introduced immediately after an extraction like of the tongue. The text reflects common practices and understandings in historical medicine, where observation was limited by contemporary knowledge, which often led to miscondictions
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	In the mouth of a patient suffering from fever six days after sunrise, and considering an abscess (ranula), it is believed that this timing might affect or signify something in their condition according to traditional medical understanding at that time. The text suggests there was some observation regarding when certain symptoms manifested
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If you see a dark or black substance there and the patient does not feel distressed about it, do not touch that area where the tongue was—this suggests an instruction in medieval medicine cautioning against unnecessary contact with what might be interpreted as necrotic tissue after such extractions. This reflects historical medical practice's emphasis on a cautious approach to patient care and postoperative management, which
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it turns white and wet within the mouth where moisture occurs (possibly indicating a reaction or infection), then apply oil delicately under this thin membrane you have seen dissolved by surgery; carefully insert around its entirety, but if your watch tells of wind at operating time, pause briefly—it is said to be mercury within these signs. This medieval treatise line suggests a therapeutic approach using olive oil or similar substances believed suitable for treating certain conditions involving moisture and potential infections post-surgery (likely referring herein to the dissolved membrane, possibly relating back to treatment of ranula). The mentioning of mercury underscs medieval medicine's use of this element as a therapesoftheoretic—an approach now considered outdated and dangerous by modern standards. It also shows how medical practitioners interpreted environmental factors (like wind) in relation to their timing or impact on the patient’s condition,
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return them back into your work where you have taken care of them until they are washed and clean, then take care that this other cure happens within which makes them heal.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Since I do not have access to external content such as "Capitol .
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	From the extraction of nail avulsions and from that which is nothing in the groin area, as well as other such detachments.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When gout attacks the joints (golayro godat), those are the swolthy lumps that have assembled from algodata [soft tissues], which become chilly and hardened; when you treat them, consider if there is a durable putrefaction in dark color with little feeling inside—do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	If it is desired that the color be red and the flesh thick, do not touch that with iron due to the flow of blood; leave it inside until matured, and if you need to extract it, then break it apart by yourself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If it is of white or chalky (color), and its consistency subtle, then that means it has been ingrained.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	Consider the operation in him/her as follows when performing your surgery; afterward if the apoplectic state has rested completely or is still somewhat present, then lift up the malady from his/her sole and place it on their chest. The servant takes between their hands nowads, pressing gently against the tongue with a noble instrument of which this is its form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it is made of silver or gold, and subtly with a cautery.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you perceive that it'dict the tongue and show it to me your lesion, hold onto it with one hand, keep it in place for an instant or more until you can remove it from those parts beyond reach as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another fluid that you extract from the tunics (the patient's clothing or body covering), and with this very same tool apply it to where this extraction is performed.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and when the extremities are grasped by forceps, their claws or talons become curved inward, sharp as iron at any given time, which is used for cutting others down whenever possible.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this tool is not with you now, then cut that bone from which it forms: And whether its form comes from one portion or another—cut!
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	Put in place another incision as per this medical method of making an incision, and apply the humoral mixture derived from water to treat it.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May it happen that the flow of phlegm inside causes these strictures within which the flow of phlegm is restricted, and take care of that part so healed to prevent its relapse.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And sometimes other measures are taken hereafter with those golden nails for cleaning out the orifice of the womb, as directed in its opening.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	E you too were a healer from excommunication, who was born in the cloister, whose apostasy tended towards blackness with little feeling; there also closed the cloister door of the monastery, and she breathed meatly between breaths, forbade water drinking and eating food by day or night.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the ulcer had grown so much that there were three spans between where it entered and exited through two wounds.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So you fed me with the cushion and lay down thereon, then extracted that large portion from him, applying pressure to another part I understood of it, securing his mouth as well, cleaning his tongue, and made me rest on that fracture.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity; it only moves slightly within here.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore it is the gout of that woman, and immediately drink water, then eat food, so she will not continue to suffer from those attacks for a long time, until the attack reaches the place where suffering continues within its duration.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Thus you must drain and cauterize the swelling of him (the patient), then move around carefully, for I have not done so yet; walk about until God completes what He has prescribed to me in this procedure.
Capitol .xxxvii.	The provided text is from an old medical manuscript discussing medieval approaches to treating joint pain
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	When the humidity of a bathroom increases when entered:
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the catarrh (nasal inflammation) occurs in the nose and it is widespdicted and long, it has no perpendicular; if it's present on a thick and rounded part of the body, then they call it boil.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When healed with the fluid we have talked about in division, you will not interfency with your treatment, and as soon as a scab forms over it, carefully apply cautery gently; if long or red/black in color that is not from this place (the body), wherein fear of touching such becomes evident—it concerns the sore on his limb.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	When you turn that second as directed by the white and long manner of his voice, whereby you split open the joints (and press on their tongue with an instrument used in shaping its form and fixing it to a quarter at once within the new position), draw one out through one or two instruments for inspection into the grooves between them.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	When you do not insert that which has been adjusted upon the patient' extrinsic part of their body, but if inserted into them there may be speech (suggesting pain relief or expression), then speak to your subject accordingly.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Return the intestine (to its cavity), using that which has been recommended for use in the treatment of two thighs' inflammation and care for it until healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient is terrified by his ignorance and uses fear during cauterization, then using a tongue for this purpose with such an instrument as we have mentioned beforehand amounts to drinking boiling water hastily. Keep the head of the hernia at your throat while doing so; place their tongue on the tool used hereinbefore described (the cautery), and put some warm water in it that has been previously indicated for use during this procedure, thus completing a living fluid which fills up to the extent:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The external cavity where medicine is applied as the handle of a knife does in terms of construction and placement on an instrument used by medicine, so that saliva or mucus from the patient' extrinsis can not come out through there for any reason, thus preventing it from affecting the knee joint.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	If you wish to prick and wrap that over the extremity of the ray (presumably referring to an arm or leg), immerse it in medicine, place the ragged cloth within soaked material wherein the rag adheres, introduce as much liquid into this container as needed for cauterization treatment—just like what'thy servant did with thine own burn wound. And set aside that period of three to four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If you are indigested and proceed with the medicine, repeat that course of action; apply cauterization within the loop of the uterus beginning at its mouth in this circuit (body), purge whatever is present therein through washing it away as water does so here, cleanse thoroughly using soap for medicinal purposes, and treat anemia with iron supplements until recovery.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This healing substance was put in with care and for a very long time out of fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some times it is cured by the water that has been poured delicately with cautery and inspection, for healing in this manner: recipe of calming herbs such as yarrow, sage, oregano, rosemary, Arabian wormwood, chamomile, mint, and similars applied to these plants; adjust all these causes (if any), even some of them together into a potion, immerse it in water where there is bubbling, over which rests an instrument made of silver or another metal as per this method.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And when that part enters the mouth of the humerus within which the breath ascends to the palate above it and whereby the palate becomes dimmed or obscured,
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Here begins the sentence to translate:
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	May it not be that you do not have this instrument with you? Then take a can and compose an enclosure outside yourself so that the mouth of the humid is moistened, for the hollow of the can prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This treatment is for health or salvation.
Capitol .xxxviii.	The provided text seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise attempting translation across
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	From the removal of thorns and waters that cling to the foot, as well as from other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Movements stick around in the groin or backbone of the body, and/or other causes.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then when you extract what is visible above them on the surface where it was placed, put your tongue against this tool immediately before sunrthy (or daylight), to make clear that it's in an abscess (gout).
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	When the cause of gout is not apparent and you observe that the patient vomits up a portion (of bile) before food in their stomach, which makes it strong within the gut where it comes out; or when one expels malady bile through defecation—or if they regurgitate sea sponge water with lemon juice and hold this strongly to your faithful hand, then take that portion firmly by mouth (and swallow), as soon as you remove their gallblad0d from the place where it protrudes outwards.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	1. E mayst thou take a fish and bind it with faithful thread, or else hold the beds and bedding while extracting them; or perhaps use a pot and scoop for extraction.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	May it not be that these causes are found at the entrance (the door), and if so, then use a leaden tool in this manner.
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And if it is a large stone that enters through its external cavity, which you place inside the patient's bladder to make urination easier.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And lift his head upwards on their shoulders, and ensure that the touch of your hands is not to their neck or backbone as it pleases the doctor who has assigned them care.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	Even if the malady that has entered therein lies within their knowledge and can be identified at once due to its location of origin (and cause), take out your instrument accordingly, as prepared according to what is necessary in accordance with how much time you have been given for this procedure.
Capitol .xxxix.	The text provided appears incomplete as it ends abruptly with "Capitol
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Given that the phrase is in a language reminiscent of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French (possibly Medieval medical terminology or Old Occitan), it seems to describe a
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When treated blood (sanguisuga) that has been mentioned in the division of healing and is not to be disturbed should consider returning it back into its place, you have at your disposal an instrument for which we recommend using; take care with this tool carefully as directed.  
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	So if you find a swelling or small movements occurrdicting pain beneath (or above), extract that little bit gently and carefully in motion.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If it is not possible to extract from there, then take a concave canula and insert that into the swelling of the malady, placing a heated iron at the bottom of the canule' extruding as much venom (so long as the sickness spirit has been killed and remains within the bulge), restrain it for the duration of the water bath.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Here comes the translation:
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If it is not for the spit-garden (mouth) that we have applied our treatment, then wash away this excess water from the mouth with mint or saffron using the same instrument used in steaming out of the mouth.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	It'supersedes the method of operation in suffocating that involves taking hold of an oil (which contains combustible elements), covered by a blanket within which there is also a spout and wherein the extremity of the instrument used for suctioning is placed. Furthermore, withdraw from underneleft; place your mouth at the end of the cannula to prevent suffocation while you are aware that the procedure has reached the surgical area, then suddenly it will occur (i.e., a complication or crisis situation arises).
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If not already done so, then repeat the subfumigation movements, and prevent excess moisture intake from foods such as soups or stews; eat salty and acidic (likely meaning sour) items instead of water when necessary to adjust this regimen.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the tool by which one extracts stone from within when seen; it resembles pincers but does not have any bend in them.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The given Latin-influenced text can be translated into English line by line as follows:
Capitol .xl.	Capitol .xl. (This line seems like it could be
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	The sentence in question appears to blend elements of Latin with medical terminology, which suggests that the speaker might be referring to a section or part (seccio) and perhaps an assembly or collection (apostemae). Given this context and attempting
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	In Latin medical texts from the Middle Asembling these elements: 'apostemae' (plural of asterixis or apatemyxia), which can be associated with neurological conditions; and possibly referencing various movements ('motos specias') as part of an examination. The sentence might suggest that certain motor symptoms, reminiscing
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	Translating this complex sentence from a medical context of the Middle Ages: 'So diversas' (in various ways), indicating multiple methods or approaches are being discussed for examination ('perforacio', which means percussion in Latin, and possibly involves auscultation – listening to internal sounds); specifically focusing on movements associated with apatemyxia. The sentence further delves into the specifics of how these humoral imbalances manifest within different body sections or parts (likely referring to areas where joint pain may be felt), suggesting an empirical
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	The translated sentence details different localizations of symptoms caused by acidos within the body, distinguishing between cap and belly (where apatemyxia may occur at distinct anatomical sites): The head has its own form of sudden onset aphasia ('apostema accident'), which is separate from abdominal 'aphasia' or confusion. Furthermore, carpal swelling due to acidos differentiates itself as well – whether in the joint (indicating arthritis) versus at junctures/joints ('locs en les quals accides'). The latter part of this line suggests that these are matters for operation; medical procedures or surgery may be required. Here, 'operacio' likely refers to both diagnostic and therapeutic interventions within
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	When some points are made that have not yet been fully developed in the sickness, and at these places of their complements or limbs, translate as follows:
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So other apastes that are dislocated when crossed and do not mature according to their function, similar to those at joints, which become established within the course of fluids in the body cavity, corrupting the ligaments or nerves of that joint; if you delay perforation beyond its ripening stage towards the main member, it will then rupture into this already ripe state and damage; but no foreign object pierced here causes indigestion completion. Rather, it is one related to the abdomen (belly), so when penetrated in an underripe condition, its elongation occurs along the divisions of the intestine therein, forming a fistula or pain within that region which will not heal on its own.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	May you know the time of the puncture for the abscess and so it is when it ripens.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	E understand that it matures when the pain subsides and fever ceases; reduce the intensity of coughing and pulsation, strengthen the head affected by apendicitis, and improve other symptoms.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	When you know where the entry point of abscess and incoming pus from treatment for elevation is,
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	Perforation is for the length of the flesh or body, if splinters are in the parts of the masses or feet, and in locations where no reflection occurs; this procedure is used wherever reflections occur according to that part.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	May it be when the abscess is in the flesh, then we must pierce through him until his digestion as confirmed by its second complementation, which allows us to have what we need; but if you puncture that area now, the patient' extrusion of pus and foul discharge will extend beyond this place, causing duress on their lips and increasing in depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	May one make an incision according to the body's structure or where it is necessary due to what part of the body requires intervention.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	When you administer a small puncture, and for larger or wide incisions according to the size of the apothecary' extrications:
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	Other than the instruments in which the cecum is wrenched and torn apart when bread falls on it and burns during its passage through there, at that moment similar to what you feel with sharp stones or bladder outbursts.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	From those who are seated with three joints; and from these ones have the shape of a miter'dictor (a type of surgical instrument), as well as that of the instruments used by surgeons for angles.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	From them in which it is administered, and resembling these ones, a round and moon-shaped portion:
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	May it not be possible for someone who cannot bear with surface lions' nails or shallow punctures that you make on the skin; they will only penetrate at most to this level (surface).
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has collected harmful pus, do not attempt to extract all of it at once; remove some from that spot today, restore the wound tomorrow with a larger piece removed yesterday, continue removing small amounts as directed until full healing occurs. (Assuming "apostema" refers to an abscess or infection site.)
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	E mostrently if the malady is caused by excessive heat or pressing of a woman/virgin, or from infancy or old age when an animal enters and exits causing illness; then you will operate on it.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	1. Watch this chapter with great caution, and place your incision there where you pierce these thorns; be sure to avoid infections, and consider whether the worm of the thorn is scant or flat, then administer whatsothy/their medicine or ancient remedies accordingly; if it's large, with fissures on your incision sites, cover each area where these cracks have come.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If in the abscess there has been detachment of part of the colon or that area has become concave within its circuit, then cover it with a tight cloth wound dressing as soon as you have applied bandages or gauze pads; and keep moisturizing this until tomorrow. 
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	May you cause a flow of sanctum during your operation, and administer cold water mixed with herbs through these hollow places; apply it over the site where the blood flows are being maintained actively.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If you continue the flow of blood, then take care to administer the prescribed medicines and powders in these places mentioned herein for treatment.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	In case of winter, and the location of abscess is a place where nerves are stressed, then cover it with powder made from vine leaves and oil bandages, placing them on top of these locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is summer and the locations are fatty, then cover them so that they can rest in water and oil for as long as possible during the daylight hours according to what we have mentioned earlier; also make sure you cure your patient with the liquid brought into their body until he/she becomes healthy.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And so it is necessary for knowledge of universal treatment methods, perhaps as I have already distinguished each manifestation of this condition in how we treat him individually.
Capitol .xli.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide enough contextual information or
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	When the section of worms (possibly referring to intestinal parasites) enters into the area underne01] The phrase "de capitol" could be a
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	When worms (possibly referring to intestinal parasites) enter the area underneck] The phrase translates as follows: "Inside their anus, and from these nodes contain tunics which are part of them; they also have movements." This translation attempts to convey that within a certain location beneath ("de codena del cap"), there may be worms with specific characteristics—possibly parasitic roundworm species.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from these contain moisture similar to lemon (lima being the Italian word for 'lime'). This phrase suggests that certain nodes within or associated with the worms hold substances resembling lime in terms of their humidity content, which could be
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And from these contain moisture similar to pulse (meaning blood or vitality), and they are part of them; among those that are stone-like in nature, hardy as well. Here the speaker describes specific nodes associated with worms containing humid materials indicative of life force ('pulse') within their structure—a concept possibly relating to parasitic activity or vitality from a medieval medical perspective where 'pols
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	In the entire section and in extracting these things there is no fear; once you have removed them nothing stands against iron (likely referring to surgical tools or instruments). This statement may reflect a process of removal where certain elements, possibly parasites within this context, can be taken out without concern if they do not resist being broken by metal objects. It suggests an understanding that the targeted structures are non-complaining
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E la operacio en seccio di quelli è che tu ospeali quelli agli strumenti della forma del quale avrai adempiuto a ricolonizzare, al cui servizio ti troverai mentre sappiate che contiene.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If you ascertain that there is moisture (suggesting excess fluid or "humor"), divide it into its segment by section, according to this manner.
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	E begins in the section of line B and enters into line G. So when moisture is expelled, you scrape off that layer which contains said moisture, without leaving any trace from it; as long as traces remain due to some cause within, they will return with urgency once more.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Here the text is being explained in a blend of languages that resembles medieval medical Latin with elements from Italian and French:
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Return it over that area which is covered with Egyptian wax sealed tightly and clean, until you feel comfortable knowing there are no underlying causes for the film; once cured by such treatment inside where they become healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	If there is an abscess of fatty nodes, then proceed in this way:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence: am section has a shape of cross, and cuts are made between its lips (or borders) by your hand, extracting your intention from that which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If your cautery causes disruption, then you must take immediate remedy or first aid.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: As for limb hardening associated with ulceration and healing as you have mentioned; over such a limb I placed it on pressure relief, which is of little sanctity and minimal moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	May also in other accidents of the head this is not its capitol; similarly to those appendages that come from children' extruded teeth and fingers, even their entire surface layer may be involved herein.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	Pause therein where they have pushed down low on their parts, that the disease may not spread to those upper regions.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Return care for that which is required at this place of healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol .xliii. (Assuming 'Capitol' refers to
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	The text you provided appears to be in a medically-related context, likely from an old or regional medical treatise possibly written during the medieval period when Latin was commonly used by physicians
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	The passage translates to:
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Here those who experience pain in the neck and where these pains originate from it all constitutes their own cloak tightly wound around themselves, as well as at the joints of the head when accompanied by relapse or abscess formation therein: similarly to what happens with scrofulosis.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	Those spices in these stones are motions, some of which are stone-like and contain moisture within them, and those that were not cured by care must be addressed accordingly.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	So in that good disposition for treatment (the linage of which color is propitious to the color of the navel and overall it's mucilaginous without affecting nerves or veins or arteries nor being protruded, so you should insert thereon a superficial piece from above this point down to below that line marked A.B., observe all along such part, inserting pieces between the corners of the navel (or lips) as needed; likewise in accordance with what has been discussed on our fingers and thumbs:
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	When possible it is necessary not to pierce the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the sanction has detached.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	So return to your operation within which you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And if inquiry is needed into any other small skull diseases that have been indicated herein, then investigate those and cleanse them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	If it is in the state of severe scrofa (a term likely referring to advanced or grave conditions), then do not insert that scrofa into its cavity.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Based on my understanding of these languages, here is a possible translation for each line in English:
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And fill in carefully that worm of soft cotton which you have already immersed in Egyptian oil, and take care of it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	If you insert that entire scrofulous lump, then adjust the lips and cheeks of it with force so much that not even a surplus remains unnecessary.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	May you find that there has been an excessive spread due to the greatness of the swelling (scrofulus), understand its root cause, and accordingly perform stitching as directed.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Return treatment for penetration is applied with wax and ointments to those areas, so that the foreign substance does not break down the body' extrinsic material (corrupt).
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	When you are about to bathe and at that moment take care of the fresh wax made from flesh within so it may be healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol .xliii. (Note: This line appears to be a reference
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	This medieval medical text in Catalan, which has elements of Latin influence and regional language characteristics similar to Italian or Spanish, seems to describe the approach taken by doctors when dealing with slipped disc (
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	Translate this line into English: "Decizion del pilhost d'aquella accident de apostema i non veiu homes nus per la gent que adreça tal dol."  
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This is the writing of those words/speeches.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	May some men have an inclination, where it is avoided that the extraction of pus may happen without causing harm to all their veins and major arteries herein.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have inserted cauterization in the mouth or with gauze or two forceps when inflammation is not in the throat, use the tongue to expel (remove) what has been caused by sharpness which causes pain as a result of piercing.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	So when we wish to take in water, that I may place the needle three or four small sections within each circle of circles (probably referring to joints), ensuring these divisions are equal between two circles for quantity, such a section should be located where bone and sinews reside; here they have no flesh.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	If the doctor is fearful, then extend the gout knife at once and open the nail of the affected area until it reaches the channel; this may prevent sepsis if there are any causes from that one in those areas.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Whenever there is an outflow for any time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	So when the hour has come for sucking out phlegm (think of it as chest or lung congestion), add mustard from the beast'dictum to that single seed, and thus remove its cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Return medicine that makes flesh inside it heal.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	For the command of water to cleanse out what has been unleashed within due to wickedness (the disease), and as this malignancy persists for three days, at that time we will direct the cleansing water herein described, ensuring its healing inside.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And when you have seen through me your doctors, one carries a stretthy and mattress into the patient's chest cavity, placing it there to apply some portion of the lung tissue upon that spot; thus calling for its healing treatment, while another addresses an abscess as if rumbling within them, discovering pus inside, then applies what was found – likely a small amount of this pus.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	So they have confessed that she had not inserted a vein or ligature, and the wind came out from below (the ground/soil), and treated her inside where there is healing heat.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And if it does not happen on the bed of illness quickly enough, return to more days with increased care for your patient'supositions: here "no" translates as 'not,' accidic means happening or occurring; sirventa seems a term related to practice/work (analogous perhaps to an operating room); rauquiera likely refers to worsening symptoms, such as increased pain or inflamm
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now say that in the section of epididymitis there is no fear: implying confidence and reassurance about prognosis within this medical condition, which suggests a typically benign
Capitol .xliv.	Now state it as such; even with capitol verse xliv in context to
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Indeed, now declare that concerning the section about osteoarthritis where pain occurs due to bony prolified growth at articulations (osteophytes), and it is referred to as a 'herniated disc'. The term ‘capitol’ often refers to an official body or document
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	Indeed, this notable arthritic condition (osteoarthritis) often presents with a prominent or 'gnarled' hip bone and is commonly seen in the females due to anatomical predispositions such as wider pelvises which may contribute to joint degeneration. The term ‘capitol’
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	It is either a second disease phenomenon or it occurs naturally; thus distinguishing between the possibility of arthritis being part of an underlying systemic condition versus developing independently as age-
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in its natural form, there is no cure: this implies that while lifestyle adjustments and symptomatic treat
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And it is either one of two potential origins: the first resembles nodes or grass-like structures in appearance which may indicate a vascsional component to her condition and could suggest blood vessel involvement; this causes concern for its pathology – potentially involving aneurysm, arteriosclerosis or another circulatory issue. The second scenario aligns with nodular changes possibly related to the spread of disease within small vessels ('nodulation'), which again raises alarm due to potential implications such as vasculitis or metastatic processes from a primary site elsewhere in the body. Both presentations warrant careful medical assess
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	When force is applied with iron only in that which is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xlv.	The text provided appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	This line is in Spanish, and it translates into English as follows: "From the spice of joint
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Translated to modern English, this line could mean something like: "Of these nerves, they have also said that all the spices are in their division." In a medical context from medieval times where terminology was different and less standardized than today'thy interpretation might be as
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	This sentence in Old Occitan (which has similarities to modern Italian, Spanish, Latin and French) translates into English roughly like this: "And where you recommend the difference between nerve and effusion which is doubted." Here a 'node'
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	This sentence continues the discussion in Old Occitan about effusion (which may refer to inflammation or swelling associated with fever and pain). The translation into English would be: "Then you say that hotness and fever are due to excessive overflow; once sedated, this bubbling dissipates. When the fever subsides along with agony and warmth, decay stops." In a medieval medical context, practitioners may have believed in humoral theory where an imbalance of bodily fluids (humors) could cause illnesses such as inflammation or pain – here potentially linked to
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	This final statement from the Old Occitan text translates into English as: "And it may not be related to heat or fever nor pain; this is where that lion's heart lies, which belongs there." Here 'node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor,' likely refers back to a specific sympt
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	In English: "And according to the color of its complexion and his consumption (or what he takes in), it may be either a cold or feverish condition; these are considered as two spices or fats, which contain moisture, whereby humidity colors themselves." Here 'color de la corpos' likely refers to both the visible signs of illness and underlying bodily fluids believed by medieval physicians. The sentence suggests that a person’s complexion (or skin color) can indicate their health status, while what they consume could affect this condition either way—either as something beneficial or harmful ('specias' suggesting medicinal spices). This aligns with the humoral theory prevalent in medieval medicine where observing external signs and one’s diet was crucial for
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Thus, when you reach the stage of healing for this node that pushes it out and investigates its form as soon as it appears in the chest where it will be positioned, according to what is required.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Here is the line by line translation into English:
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If there is an outflow of moisture, regardless of its color, then you should inspect the surface just above as mentioned in the other applications.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If you do not remove moisture from the trace of insertion, then understand that they are fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	If it has a shape like a sickle according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	When you have learned it as I teach you, and lift that one out which is upon the backbone of all parts with ease, and cleanse the spine in its entirety; if possible, cover the pelvis or sac over there, to extract that evil from the vertebra.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If in the operation it is broken and cannot be removed entirely at once, continue working carefully so as not to break any further until inside where nothing can cause damage again.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If from there any cause arises (medically), scarce or too much, then return according to its means.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you find that from the patient' extramundane (outside their body), a small part is affected by some sharply corrosive and acute powders, close over this area where it has become cauterized, and treat the other wounds within while they heal.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If it is great, then touch your lips on them and heal that body part containing much water within (emphasis or edema).
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	May blood flow be to the contrary, or not-pulsating, then bind and seal off the area where pus has formed, allowing two days or three within which maggots can consume it (and thus cleanse) while boiling water is applied inside for up to two or three days until returning what was ruptured from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol .xlvi. (The original text does not provide enough context
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	From the necessary tools for sectioning and puncturing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of these injections and their forms from three species, some great and others small; they migrate within them and grow therein.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of insertion is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of introduction is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of insertion is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	These are iron points from axle, blade, and lower limbs properly positioned to feed the interior in the stitches.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of experience and they bear names; among these is one whom we call Berith.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	So with three spices, four of them are great for reducing itch and pain.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	La form of deep experience is its shape:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	La form of experience in this context refers to 'form' as understood by medical practitioners at that time – possibly relating to a
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The phrase "La forma de experient pauca" translates into English line-by-line as follows: The form of experience little
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	The English translation for the line "Conveniesse que sien por aquellos apostemas y exitsus, e fístulas y bóbulis para qué entre ellos los huesos y otras causa" is: It convenes that they are due to those ulcers and effluxions (which could refer to the discharge from wounds or inflammation), abscesses, and swellings between
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	The English translation for the line "Eso faciès redontz grosses leons ayssi cum grans agulhas les cuales son cosidas con selahe om es feys desferros o fer, e las milloras so faytas de eram citri" is: It forms hardened lumps and pus-filled abscesses that are sewn up with large needles made of iron or steel; the silver ones form likewise.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	When black bile experts agree that these are the places where abscesses occur in their cavities and are reflected upwards to their ascents correspondingly:
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	So with three kinds of medicine: one derived from their lengths (lor so loncs), and others made by various mixtures (echs migiers, et autres breus), according to the quantity appropriate for the size of the fistula and stricture of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of great lead experience:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The form of patient' extrication from lead (implying removal or treatment related to exposure/injury):
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the experience with lead, possibly referring to a medical case where someone has come into contact with or is suffering due
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of bones are from movements that range from simple to complex ones; they include large (great), small and intermediate shapes – each with its own unique curve or curves in a way specific only for these structures as if crafted solesly by nature's design: the grand, the pauper, and intermediates.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	From what they eat, and from three spices.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	From those points has painful curves appeared, each of three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	From what they have (patients), there are three curves, and from these, three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	All of this is necessary in that place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a single grain, shape of limb:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of single joint motion:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small joint, shape of the foot:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of large joint:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of an ointment, form of lime:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of anointed oil is small, shape like water:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of an egg has two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of anointment has two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of an obtuse has two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of an egg has three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The form of an egg has three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of an egg has three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the forms of the scalpels used for cutting and removing nodes and attachments, consisting of three kinds: those made from bone, snake (likely referring to a type of metal), and few others not specified here.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of the scalpel for use:
Forma de scapel pauc:	The shape of the scalpel is meager:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The outside of these things are where the sharp sections occur and not there because they're stopped in such a way, but for it to be healed properly through excision on nodes fearing injury to veins or nerves, and by those shall the ulceration (ulcer) and troubled flesh find restful calmness due to this cooling effect.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are forms of alchemy, and they come in three kinds: large (gran), medium (migio), and small (pauco), just as you see them.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of great bone:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of Magdema's migration is as follows (translation attempt):
Forma de magda pauc:	Shape of stone-like pain:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	Splinters from earth and like-kind forms of coal, which they say is arsenic; this gives pain in the body'thy parts where it rests upon itself (itself).
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	When it is in the exterior mattress and hidden within that bedding space at its parts divided into sections below, as you lift up, go with ease along these spaces.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	When discussing the forms of cauterization (burns), which are not seen by physicians through apendages and do not reveal diseases, there are three kinds: large, small, and light.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are the forms of those things:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of breezes are those by which the flow of blood is abandoned, and they come in three kinds: large, migrating, and small; these are called 'wind' here.
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	Sick joint pains are yellow-colored and round in some lengthy formations, and subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	When these spices of vinegar must be large or small pieces to allow the ascent through those openings with haste when necessary and at that time which medicine cannot cure.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	Even though you should not use them to excise entirely from the body'dictate places only in fleshly areas such as those of hammocks and thighs/hips, like skinny ligaments, breast tissue, abdomen (belly), or belly button area which are similar.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Here are the line-by-line translations:
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Some times joint pains are round in this manner:
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol .xlvii. (The original text does not provide further context for
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	From the care of men's breasts, which are assembled from women:
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some days the breasts of sleepy men are swollen with their midnight feasting, and when they're thus inflated, puffed up, and assembled on women’s chests, flat-nosed goblets often come into use.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	To the one who drinks water, cover that which descends from the second segment of the lunar path according to this manner, along line B to line G, and wash out the growth entirely, applying externally padded medicinal flesh (ointment), adjusting the lips around it placed on clothing, and heal what is inside so as to restore health.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	May if the breastbone dips to parts at once and is softened by its own movement, likewise in women with two pus-filled masses below them, akin to lunar slices, within which each contains what belongs to it; as long as the main line holds the smaller one according to this form of their respective lines B. and G., then remove the tongue between both labia lips of the swine (a reference possibly to using pig bladder for surgical purposes), cleanse the entrance of these masses, and administer what has been mentioned as necessary in treatment until recovery is achieved.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not complete the inspection of the water that flows within due to malaise and flux of bile, then cover what is inside with putrid oil soaked in corrosive substance; furthermore, take care for which part has been cured:
Capitol .xlviii.	The provided text is not directly translatable as it appears fragmented or encoded rather than
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	This line seems to be in a form of Latin influenced by other Romance languages, which may make direct translation challenging without additional context. However, I will attempt an educated guess based on
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	The line translates to: "When the arthropods come at times they tickle these hard spices of sclerotidia, which contain a pith." This sentence appears related to entomology and refers to certain types of beetles or other small creatures that might burrow into plant structures such as bark (suggested by "scroph
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	This line discusses arthropods that contain moisture within them and are embedded in the cambium layer of a plant stem (likely between two lines marked as .G. and .B.). It suggests these pests must be evacuated, or removed because they carry disease ('sickness'). The removal should take place entirely to prevent further infestation on another day ("le entro al autra dia").
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	Return its cover both for treatment and healing purposes until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	If the suppuration of the glands and spleen occurs therein as we have mentioned in the section about the spleen, then divide it over that ache as described.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the child is expanded so much that it burns down and creates pain, then apply treatment as soon as possible now.
Capitol .xlix.	The provided text appears to be from an ancient medical document written in Old French or a similar
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	In this line, the speaker is referring to parasitic worms that may enter through contact with soil (by means of "arceria," which can be interpreted as a mistake or confusion for
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When soil (presumably impure or contaminated) comes into contact with the worms' cloaca ("the lower part of its body where waste is expelled"), they form an infection that can spread to joints and cause inflammation through blood vessels: when such a parasitic infestation occurs, it migrates downward toward one’s feet; moreover, if you attempt to remove the worm during convulsions or spasms of these limbs ("the parts where they are contorted"), that's when pain and possibly coughing up blood can be felt in those areas.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And he who is brought back by vein from body part returns its manifestation of limb.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Over that which belongs to them for an inflammation of the liver (hepatitis), divide it into sections along their spine; and cut off part of the section with incisions, and remove or repair the liver so that it may be revealed within where previously was hidden.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And lift up the place where there are two ligaments and a splint inside that has set in completely within it, breaking its adhesion.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Return the treatment in which it was generated, and give care to that with suitable ointment while they heal inside where their ligaments are located.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If it is an abscess in the vein's segment, then you must apply pressure with what touches your arm that which can be applied to the abscess at the navel; insert the needle there where you have previously touched your arm, and make this enter; and as for its double-layered section, introduce it into each of these layers respectively in accordance with what was said earlier about threading through fruit grains from both ends of a filament.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that we may pull out the thread, then insert it into the corresponding hole made for new injections at once and tightly bind your limbs to four locations.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return the position over this small part that you have immersed in water and oil, and apply the treatment it is said to cure for gout and ointments inside until healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capital of inflammation caused by twisting of nerves - Here begins the ailment we are discussing, likely referring to an injury or condition resulting from such action on the nervous
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	 In the capital of inflammation caused by twisting of nerves—here begins the ailment that Ayssi suffers; it appears as if she has an inflammatory condition in her shoulder and vein(s), possibly indicative of irritated or compressed nerves, especially since these symptoms occur upon percussion (tapping) or from excessive straining. The reference to "seemingly" suggests that the observed signs may not be definitively diagnosed but rather strongly suggest a specific issue with her nervous system in those areas implied by physical examination techniques
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	 It is found that Ayssi's painful pains are located in the hands of her assistants or feet, or anywhere where joint discomfort has worsened—this indicates potential issues with these regions which may contribute to our understanding of her symptoms and their origin. The phrase "maugudas juncturas" (worn-down junctions) implies that there might
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	 It is severe inflammation (apostema), and it has spread to another part of the body—this highlights that Ayssi's condition could be complicated by a systemic reaction where symptoms appear elsewhere in her body, particularly given how she feels overwhdict when affected; this sudden onset during violent movements suggests acute distress. The term "malaute semblant stupor" (feeling of intoxication resembling dizziness) may indicate Ayssi's state becomes exacerbated by inten
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	It is not an inflammation in the core of her body—this could mean that Ayssi's primary issue may be more superficial or related directly to external factors rather than internal organ pathology, given how she suddenly feels weak and unable to attend meetings ahead of schedule; this indicates a level of debility influencing not just physical but also professional activities. The phrase "maugut" (weak) combined with the inability “not attending nor following behind” suggests that
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Thus those who are infiltrated by iron at the joints will find relief upon intervention.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	May that person who is in his or her head or forehead at the base of the skull, where there are ligaments (spine), experience relief.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	May it be a small ulceration, then take that one here and remove those from the flesh as you can cut them off.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is large, suspend that one on an enema and cleanse the same, then apply bandaging to the wound for healing inside where it resides. Adjust the patient accordingly with proper treatment within so they recover healthfully.
Capitol .li.	The provided text seems incomplete as it ends abruptly with "Cap
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	La frase en español dada sugiere un contexto médico, probablemente relacionado con una condición llamada afección oral o estomacal ("apostema") donde hay inflamación
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	 La traducción del texto en español al inglés puede ser la siguiente:
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	Here comes another sentence to translate: And there is one seen here, and in his abdomen were two things that seem like flesh, and there was no difference between these small ones, tiny reasons (or causes).
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And their lips were turned outward and parted, with moisture running throughout that time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	So I have incised these and inserted a dart in each, one for sixty-eight units and the other for twenty units.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	If you see the patient fearful and restless (guard your patience), there may be a need for immediate action with fresh iron points drawn, applied firmly to that area which we have described herein; allow it to remain thus for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Here comes another sentence to translate: Adjust within the tightness of the iron pipe' extricating it not ceases its strength until it is separated and detached by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If his iliac (hip) region is large and causes fear or concern, there may be some cause of worry herein, mainly when it's in the abdomen area.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you divide the mass of it, and apply caustic there so as not to return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Return that within which must be healed (the patient).
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	Even though you should not assume an ill-colored piece with little feeling and poor movement control; that is where cancer (cancer) begins.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	When time for recollection of brain arrives now.
Capitol .lii.	Capitol .liii. (The provided text does not contain enough context
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Regarding nurturing or care for the navel area, it can be translated as: "Concerning the care
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The eminence of the navel is affected by motions or cracks on its surface that are present over other ruptures; this may be due to blood flow from a vein or artery as mentioned hereafter, or because it's constrained and thus winded. The original text appears to discuss possible causes for pain in the navel area which could include issues like fluid accumulation (blood) resulting from cracks on its surface that might occur due to other ruptures nearby; this can be further complicated by restricted blood flow, possibly caused by a blockage or narrowing ("coartation").
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If there is a tear in the cistern and rupture of the fabric, then the color of the ulceration resembles that of the body; it hurts like a lion, appearing from various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is due to the discharge of the intestine, then you have noted that which we counted earlier today, with great variability in intensity; when this has occurred and your patient's condition becomes apparent, return now; so quickly as possible, lavate their abdomen vigorously.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	May it be for moisture, I (the physician) will not hide myself when near your hand, nor constrain you, nor make a pact with you.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is for sanitation, then at this time you will appear on their nails blackened by descending melancholy (depression).
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	May it be due to meat nothing severe, hard and long-lasting; then is set according to a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to windiness, then touching of him/her (the patient) becomes a lion.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And when considering the operation on it is that you ponder whether the eminence of the navel is due to stone intervention, vein or windiness; and if so forbidden in its treatment as taught by your teacher here mentioned (those instruments for artery and vein), then out of fear and apprehension.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If the prominency of the navel is due to the intestine or the membrane, then order your humors (body fluids) that hold it tightly stretched out; and assign a guardian within its circuit throughout all parts above yours on top of them, as well as in their place where you have placed the cushion. Then command whoever is between those hands to stand opposite each other across from one another over said position held by hand pressure, encircle around this spot with spinal splint (a type of medical restraint), and hold tightly onto that which lies below these joints where ligaments are located; also maintain the treated appendage within its circuit using either a strong rope or chain, along with your own strength.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	If you have torn the fabric (possibly referring to skin or sinews), then take that one out now; and incise those surplus parts of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is contrary to your artery or vein, surround that area, and return to your work; take two needles and insert them into those fields of forceful entry where you have pierced the abscess in a cramping manner on the knee joints (which allow penetration), firmly clasp it within four parts using the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If you wish to do so, place the needles and insert them into where it pierces the extended flesh, then incise that part when it is subtle and inserts itself, placing care for what comes out of the wax within which it becomes healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the navel's prominence is due to fleshlessness or moisture in it, then you must address this swelling as quickly as possible and extract dirt and humidity from it, which causes discomfort there, taking care of whatever comes out at that time.
Capitol .liii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide enough context or language structure
De curacio de cranc.	The line provided, “Curacio de cranc,” appears to be a mix
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have spoken about the division of species within a head and how it relates to their healing, which is directed so that there's no ulceration; we also discussed this specific kind created by looking after oneself."  
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And there are certain things from which they can be removed in that place where it is possible for their cure, namely those present within her breasts or belly and similarities of the limbs allocated for expulsion entirely get rid of them, mostly when consumed.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When it is old and grave, you cannot provide for him here; neither have I seen any cure nor has anyone come to offer help with this malady.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	When the operation is when you allocate acupuncture as we have discussed before, and purge black damp accumulations occasionally, it'thy done that which has been externally exhibited by a swelling (which likely refers to an inflamed or infected area).
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Lay down the scab and do not cut that wound away, express those places, and cleanse it with whatever means you have at your disposal (within reach of tools).
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	May you face opposition due to the thickness of veins or arteries, then heat that treatment within where blood flow has ceased; take care for it also serves as another form of healing until everything is cured.
Capitol .liv.	Capital (likely referring herein as "capital," meaning head
De curacio de ydropici.	The phrase "curacio di ydropdownizi" appears nonsensical and is
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	 We have recommendations here in the division of seafood from water and the properties of each spice used for its treatment with it as medicine essentials.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	That which is cured by iron alone is the essence of vitality itself and not brought near to the spirits of tympanites or cholera; for it is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	When you have already treated this herb-infused drumming remedy and do not wish for your medicine to cause discomfort, consider that if the ailment in the belly or bowels has been alleviated, it is also beneficial elsewhere too; similarly when treating either of these organs herein present. Be cautious so as not to treat them with iron-based remedies for fear they may worsen your condition thereafter.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If at some time the thigh's excessive vitality occurs, and this is not another illness but merely water sufficiency to an extent that your patient neither has fever nor sweats; then it is the case of raising their thigh between themselves and applying pressure on their abdomen with their hand for drawing out the water immediately after ejaculation. Apply prickles spines according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	Such acute parts may have a splint attached to them with sponge; however, there might also be small attachments made gradually at first, ensuring that during the operation it does not enter into or harm the intestine and allowing you to hold those appendages.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of watery humors is due to illness in the patient'thy belly (belly button), then your hand should be on its left side for three days.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	If the cause of it is from malabsorption (from a stone in the spleen), then your body part should be straightened out directly.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And only when your team is on top of the ribcage so that there are no unnecessary movements, allowing for proper treatment without interruency.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Here is the translation for each line:
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Return through which hole I shall pierce so that the stone may come up here, into this water place.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Return that outwardly and insert an instrument of which this is its form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it appears to be a silver needle subtly; made of either silver or ivory/ivory-like leather, where at the bottom part you place a small pinch with your finger tip (as per penmanship), and on their legs there are three pins: two from one batch and one from another - these belong to the pointed end according to handwriting style.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And when the armor is outside of him, as soon as you put your instrument in the water, that will immediately go onto the instrument and evacuate the water to such an extent within one hour; but if not all of it is removed by then, he may drown due to his own fault or because five fingers are deemed necessary for a proper death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	When the discharge is according to the quantity of its viscera and as you understand it means for their abdomen' extrusion (and beauty) balance,
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Here comes the sentence to translate: And take out the instrument, and pour water that causes it to be retained by the belt holding back what is above the cistern from which you are instructed to pierce according to their mannerism.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	Here the instrument is to be returned and taken out of water if the patient tolerates it well, taking out a small amount each day as directed by reason (prudence), allowing fluid intake for several days while being careful not to exceed its limit; thus avoiding excessive consumption.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear about the swelling (or fluid accumulation), and apply a large quantity of water poured upon it, burying that part in sand until healed, while massaging with oil or lotion for an extended period under sunlight; this will cure whatsoalready needs medication to dry up.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	When the wound is on the abdomen, and both spoon and fork aid in water extraction as previously mentioned.
Capitol .lv.	The provided text seems to be from an ancient medical treatise combining elements
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	When translating the given line concerning children with bladder conditions that have not been perforated, here is a possible English translation:
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some times children are sick from the womb of their mother, and neither is the head of their mixed constitution pierced (or it's torn apart or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Thus a corset maker goes through the fabric so thinly that it appears as if they are piercing the skin beneath delicately, according to this manner.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Ensure rest in the womb with a delicate chisel of lead and wire that holds it there for three days or four nights.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	When one feels need to urinate or defecate (remaugut and hurreina), then return that sensation back.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If you do not stop the blood flow, then it is possible that the urine will be above this place and does not drain away here.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	May that which causes strain be treated with iron from the hearth, as we have said beforehand, within a few days until it is intensified.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	May those from which the trouble is not in their place cause discomfort to them, where they are lodged; that causes it at its own height above the knee joint of bone so hindering urination within these lower parts, and this illness originates there due to bad semen according to my understanding.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And when you perform your operation of blood flow, some motions make the fluid acid; and pause at that point in the liquid wherein you separate the blood, so as to cure what is within.
Capitol .lvi.	Given that "Capitol" likely refers to an item or location within
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	This sentence appears to be from a medical or anatomical context, likely discussing conditions related to the penis (given the use of Latin-derived terms like "prepucii," which refers to foreskin). The text seems to describe pain associated with inflammation ("vergua"), corruption ("corropcio"), and darkness/blackness that may suggest a form of infection or damage. Additionally, there is mention of
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	The sentence translates to: "These recurrent pains are felt within the foreskin and stand out due to their thickness of meat." Here, 'motas' means cramps or spasms; 'veguadas accideys,' indicating a repetitive nature
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	This translates to: "Of one is malicious and the other not." This statement suggests that there are two different conditions being described—one harmful or potentially cancerous ('malicious') and
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	This line translates as: "And suspend one under gentle and delicate care while extracting the other entirely out of its entirety; afterward place that on top over which it is submerged in Egyptian ointment, and similarly apply this healing oil within wherein they are cured." This sentence appears to describe a traditional medical practice involving careful extraction ('extractando'), perhaps referring to the removal or treatment of diseased tissue. 'Enguento egipcio' could refer to an ointment used in ancient Egyptian medicine, known for its healing properties and possibly containing specific ingredients believed to have medicinal benefits—although without further context about what exactly this is treating ('la entidade'), it’m not clear whether we
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	The translation here is: "And if the foreskin condition (albater) is malignant and black in appearance," then take measures to apply cautionary instruments properly within it, according to its size or extent ("inscizo" meaning 'size' or 'extent', while "razio" could imply a proportionate aspect of treatment). This sentence advises on the appropriate course if an abnormality (sug
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	May there be an uncircumcised foreskin on the head of the penis, and one part is cut off while another remains intact; as you hold it during insertion until consolidation occurs within that time frame; furthermore, when curing this defective incision, ensure not to overlook its potential retraction.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	Here you inspect the genitals and foreskin blackness and swelling; therefore cover all that has already been darkened and is at risk of discoloration or corruption, applying layers upon it with honey mixed with crushed wheat bran flakes and ground herbs.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	Return that limb back into health so it can heal itself with its own medicine.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	May it be necessary for fluid flow from sanctity (or purification), then apply luna-phase cupping according to this method.
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	When two types of instruments for cleansing and curing are necessary because the fluid has turned foul (corrupted), it is to these means that we resort.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	If the head of the gallbladdict is corroded and destroyed at once, then it must be inserted into the body wall with a bronze tube to allow bile secretion through that canal.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the attachment of the prepuce at the base of the foreskin (and this adherence is not detached here, but rather there where it attaches; and when detachment occurs due to dirt or scab) you must scrape out hardened blood within which dissolves the ligament entirely.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	If it is difficult to reach those exquisitely, then cover your hand with sponge and seek out any cause of the head or foreskin; once you find these causes, when they are subtle but forceful in their emergence, penetrate them gently through skillful manipulation.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	When the membrane between the foreskin and the head of hair is separated gently by that delicate touch under which it already lies in the humoral fluid, so that there are not other greasy substances present.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Return its treatment within that it is sealed tightly for solidification.
Capitol .lvii.	Given that this text is in an archaic form of Latin with elements remin
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	The refined nurturing and care for those who have undergone circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuity with other plagues: however, when it comes from our operation and intention, especially in children, we assign them to the better operation and route of purification lost limbs.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	So it is said that ancient ones did not perform circumcision on free men, nor use them for their laws, and only obtain these when they try through experimentation. This causes the loss of a large part of artisans and barbarians who practice circumcision with new tools made from bone and ligature using the glue produced by flies' feet; and they apply adhesive bandage to their nails, which is where these people hold onto.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	E you have already tried all these methods and found them worse than crude sharpening on iron or thread/felt that in the sharpness of metal, some parts (of pain) move downwards from above, others lower into the crotch area between two tunics, and tension rises throughout the body, leading to other insights and safe suffering.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And cleanse it with which is used by barbers (for hair removal), not safe for the ignorance of the limb'supremacy,' such that when they enter into his body.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	May in the operation have a sharp iron or rust and ruin your work.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The child'thy tongue is naturally short and prone to habitual movements that do not require cleansing, but have been observed by him.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	May humoral formulations be made with refined wine and sinews of the hind leg, for good health; since the potency when applied as intended is equal to that which I have experienced myself—and therefore having proportioned my two concentrations accordingly, apply them in a measured exchange within some time; this will result in compression of the foot' extruding all swelling from it without fail.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And the primary aspect of the initial operation is that you make sure the child remains mostly if not entirely in their cradle for only one day and then let them enter into another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Return that joy throughout all of your body, which is what you are capable of absorbing as much intelligence from it.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Here comes the translation of each line:
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Return the designated spot on the foot with your finger (the first lia), and place the base of this small tool/ligature there as well (second ligament). Position your hand over that area to maintain pressure between two such ligatures, holding their hands in the process.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of scissors indicates this form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	These are the bones outside and others inside that should not be torn by pulling out like a lever's length with two handles grasped in hand.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	May mistakes in cleansing are easily escaped inside the internal structure entirely or a portion of it; you must understand this well.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	So that you spread it over your toenail downwards from the wound and insert it according to its own weight.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	If you cannot hold it with your tongue, then remove that amount from under one'se and incise that same quantity.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it has been three days and the swelling from the inflamed puncture hardens quickly, then apply water to encourage the cautery wound to heal easily, and exacerbate that which you have prepared for me.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	Guard your head from the patient'supinated', for not will they drink it.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And so care for that water which congeals from the dusts, within the passage of these very same dusts.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If it is inserted into the neck in measure and you observe their parts below, you will not notice them here (within).
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	May he take care of that which we have said is within it so as to be cured.
Capitol .lviii.	I apologize for the confusion, but it seems there is missing context necessary for a meaning
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	The phrase "curacio di l'urina ritenuta nella vescica" translates to English as "care of retained urine in the bladder
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	The translation of the line from a medieval medical treatise discussing causes for retained urine in the bladder is as follows:
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved and remains for a while in the place where it already is at the base of the bladder, then allow the bile to rise over your belly buttons (navel).
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And place their feet on top of their two and stretch out the abdomen as far below them from under their legs, tightening the belly so much as is possible to you.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	So when the bladder's neck is tightly squeezed in its cavity below, allowing for complete emptying of the urine.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If it is not dissolved by the water we have mentioned earlier with great force, then take action to remove its cause using this instrument that you call a thin silver lance or slender lion spear; which has delicate and long points on one end like a penis tip of an asp (a sharp medical tool), resembling both a palm and the middle finger.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	When poultices are applied on the thigh and soaked cloths of honey and aloe are used for them, with oil and wort (hops).
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	When you extend the iron slowly over the wool little by little, for the urine also washes out (or cleans) the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .lix.	In translating this medieval medical treatise from a language with Latin roots mixed into
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	When the quality of enema application is being discussed and tools that are in accordance with it come into play, translate this line by focusing on medical equipment used for an enema:
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When ulcers or abscesses appear in the bladder, or when they become swolthy and compressed by pressure, you will find them there distilling waters and medicines; this is what has been applied to me using the clamping instrument.
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	sino que in the exterior of it is silent, thus it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that situation, two times from one division come together.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the meal is where it'dicts itself into being (here), and its second quantity that approaches thereupon will be drawn from here; when any cause draws this in, then also such forcefully withdraws it back again to here as well – once released for a while until something else pulls at or pushes against the substance. When liberated long enough (presumably out of control), fire essence enters into naval battles on sea-warfare due to its release and interaction with external elements like wind, water currents etc., symbolically representing how imbalances can trigger painful reactions in medieval medical contexts.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So when you wish to prevent moisture in the bladder, insert the extremity of crab' extrusion into the moistness, and draw out that water which is pushing against those parts below (the implication being it ascends towards these areas), whereupon this humidity will be drawn upwards.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return the exterior of the chamber into the vessel as recommended in the cure; and apply pressure with the moisture you introduce therein, where that moisture will overflow towards the bladder, and gout settles down there.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape under which the bladder is distorted, and that form is this one.
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And whether it is silver or thin as feather quill, and quickly insert thread into the wound using linen (or silk).
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Return the limb of the crucifix into its cavity, and place your hand on it so that the limb does not protrude outwardly.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	May if you do not have a bladder present, then take an egg from the pargoes and make of that circle; pierce all around its thickness; properly position your faithfully strong hand within those disruзуptions, as long as so it is turned over; place therein whatsoever water or waters you wish to pause in.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And take that into the tool and make it go there as you did with your hands in the bladder's entrance, expressing where my moisture will enter the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	The provided line does not appear to be part of an actual text but seems like
De extraccio de peyra.	Translation for "De extraccio de peyra" into English, based on the context
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	Translation for the provided line: "De extraccio de peyra" translates to English as follows within the context of medical extraction and treatment:
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	In which stone they perform surgery today, a part of it remains undone and unfinished.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	When properly formed in the bladder is that which resides within it precisely, as follows:
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And he who tells this story shows its manifestation and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	So it is said that urine produced mainly in the bladder of children; and from its kidnethy (kidney), the urine seems like water due to its subtlety, appearing therein [in the area]; and the uterus chafes the pubic bone, causing discomfort with intermittent pains. In this place it is necessary that a forum be held for these issues.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is a healing for those children within who have reached fourteen years, and treatment in the limbs is difficult.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	When it is necessary for youths to move among these waters (or humors), there are four spaces between them where movement occurs.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	From that from which the stone is larger and poultice applied lighter; if it is scarce, contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	So when you reach the treatment of that, cover it with a cloth from which worms crawl out completely through the hole where your bones are; this hole occasionally prevents dirt and lice inspection.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Return its position to the thighs and lower it down into the bladder sac or whereby some steps are taken for that reason; so as not for want of urine descent on the pelvis bone, nor leap from place itself with a few movements.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Here returns the catheter among your prepared ones, and all of them are placed at once for that reason; thus, the bladder as a whole will descend gradually into its parts immediately.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	When it is necessary for that intestine or hernia (to be returned), place your hand over all of its area, preventing any displacement
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the hernia in space, then touch it gently with your hand above it to secure its position. (This translation attempts to maintain the original medieval text's medical context while conveying contemporary English.)
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	If not for long does your touching last, then take up the tool you were shown by my left hand if a child's hernia (affect), or that little spoon from over there if youth has been completed; insert this into its place within one’thy belly. (Here I have translated each phrase while trying to reflect both the medical practice described and retain some of the old-world linguistic style, focusing on actions directed by age—children versus young adults.)
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Whenever you find that hernia within your touching duration; (This translation continues the medieval medical discourse, maintaining a direct and simple instructional tone from one to another.) Here I am referring
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	Convert that small into its proper place within your bladder neck (the junction where the urethra enters and exits). The instruction seems to be guiding someone through an
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Prepare the tool as directed and remove it from there at that spot where you've secured your hand (This translation maintains clarity while attempting to convey an action sequence within medieval medical practice, likely referring to a specific procedure or instrument handling.) It appears I am continuing with translating instructions for surgical preparations consistent with the original tone. Here are
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	Order the servant to press upon your bladder with their hand; and direct another attendant from over there extend hands towards those parts below (likely referring to lower abdominal regions), while instructing yet another of them, if necessary, tighten around that area where needle actions are occurring—this might relate to suturing or other precise procedures within the site. The translation aims at capturing both direct orders and context-specific medical language from medieval times into contemporary English without losing any detail regarding professional responsibilities during an operation:
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Returns it into its bedroom (its cavity), and places your hand over this area so that the intestine does not come out.
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And divide the water between the knee and thighs herein present; not in the middle of the left hip socket, but on that stone above the knee joint—thus forming a transverse section which makes the section wide enough to be cut according to the amount necessary for this place, without exceeding what is needed since it contains the portion already there within the abdomen.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	Be aware that there is no stone from which treatment can be done due to the fact it has angles and edges; thus care must be taken here.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	From that fluid it appears like a lion roaring upon its hunt, round and made of body humors for purification (or cleansing).
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So if it is that which has been turned or stretched outwards in any part of you, adjust within the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	If there is not an opening for the cure (treatment), then make a design over that part which hurts or where you apply pressure on it, ensuring your finger with a file when applying this to the skin surface; do not escape from doing so – insert immediately undernethy instrument of delicate curvature.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	May you not be able to hold on to that, then increase the disturbance a little; if you see flow of bile coming out, dissolve it quickly with sulfuric vinegar (vitriol).
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	May your stone is one of it [the bladder], then lead the mass to its mouth, and press on it there; also carry another small amount here with you; seemingly they are bile stones from disorders.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If there is heavy blood (pathology), ignorance on your part leads you to insert that large section into the uterus, where it either stagnates or ascends due to continuous urine discharge; thus, not all parts are fully secured.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	May administer extraction from within that has been dislodged, or in the case of a fracture inside where tools are placed to extract it therefrom.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So when you have completed your task, then fill the womb of our bodies with the juice of aloe and of dragon'dicts blood, and strengthen it thusly.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	When pressure is applied over that cloth steeped in oil and vinegar or water mixed with the same (oil and wine), to ensure that hemorrhage ceases.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Return the bladder above the belly, and do not allow the ligature inside for more than three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	When that air ascends and separates it into water vapor and oil, take care of it with healing balm inside the chamber within which it is contained so that it may be cured.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	Might if in the patient's wool you cauterize an ulcerated area that is softened and decayed (and it resembles when the bladder is frozen, where urine flow is forbidden), then insert a sponge into the body of the patient and remove this swelling.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	In the hours of complete treatment, where you have both thighs and adjust the stopped medicines on the location.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the stone is small and located in the bladder, it remains there, and urination is prohibited; as a result, this patient has been advised to drink water before reaching the next stage of treatment. Now you have extracted the water (urine), and now hold onto an iron knife for this purpose:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	From outside the body cavity, gout lodges in a pipe (or possibly referring metaphorically). Here is an attempt at line-by-line translation into English from Old or Med
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Attach the thread firmly and tie it over that stone piece on the bone to prevent its return into the bladder (this line suggests an attempt at surgical fixation or restraint, likely in medieval medical practice). The context implies managing some type of fistula or abnormal connection where urine might flow outside the body cavity
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Insert iron into that stone piece (potentially as part of an intervention or tool), through which the forceps can easily reach to address it at that specific bone site. This line indicates a procedure using metal implements for surgical purposes, possibly related to setting fractures, removing foreign objects like stones from body cavities, or other internal treatments in medieval times (it suggests an operation where precision is critical
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	The forceps rotates within that small bone piece gradually and completely punctures the existing hole, after which it's clear all traces of urine have been drained out (this line implies a methodical approach to repairing or remediating an injury involving fluid loss from bladder perforation). Here we see detailed account in medieval medical literature describing precise surgical technique likely used for treating urogenital trauma. The use of forceps suggests skillful manipulation and removal during the procedure, crucial elements to successful intervention at this period (the text delves into specific
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Place your hand over that which is torn from the bone piece away from the stone's position; this area was sewn shut to close off any opening through which urine might escape and for bleeding (this line refers to a step in surgical management where after removing what appears as foreign bodies such as stones, suturing or stitching is performed. The aim here would be not only to stop the loss of fluid but also control hemorrhage—a common complication at that time). This indicates an understanding and response by physicians dealing with obstetric emergens during this era (the
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this cure is not within your reach for any reason that prevents you from it, then take a stone at once and place one under the bedrock (or foundation), while another rests above it in your hand(s).
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	When pressed upon over that stone in between his knee joints.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Return that outwardly. (This line suggests returning something external or protruding
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Adjust the ligament and purify the swollen joint within (or on) the ground. (This line indicates making adjustments or corrections to a knee's ligament that has become inflamed and refers possibly backyard treatment, considering medieval medicine was often practiced in non-cl
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary to use chain of the belt on stone suddenly (in other words: do not immediately apply restraint with such material), but rather to prevent it from returning back into its cavity, and once this has been done, if you have loosened said fastener previously attached above undernethyardum ("on or below"), then as soon as the belt is released thereupon (from around that area where adjustments were made), the cushion/support returns to place and reclaims ground.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	When it is necessary to lift the leg below (to treat or adjust), you must raise the knee joints upwards (towards their respective positions) and return your touch for what was previously discussed together with them.
Capitol .lxi.	Given that "Capitol .lxi." does not provide context or
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	The phrase "de les femnes" refers to women, and the term "extraciru" seems like a misspelling of
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Translation: The stone in woman's breasts is scarcely produced or formed. This sentence appears from an older medical perspective, possibly discussing the formation and quantity (
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	The sentence in English would be: "If there is stone present at any of those places, the treatment is difficult to administer and it's forbidden for superstitious individuals." Here we have a discussion about medical challenges or beliefs surrounding treating stones (possible gallstones) within women. The term 'peyra', historically used in medicine, refers broadly nowad
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The sentence translates to: "One of them is the woman who has less bile." In this context, it's referring possibly to a person with lower levels or ins
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	The translated sentence is: "And the second one is that you cannot find a woman who removes it on her own when examined by a doctor or belongs to those women with no childbearing capacity." This line suggests concerns about self-remediation of certain conditions in contrast between different groups—those capable and seeking professional medical advice, versus others perhaps presumed unable due to reasons like infertility. Here 'descro
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The translated sentence would read: "And the purest is that you cannot find a woman who knows this art, mostly due to operation." It implies there might not be many women with knowledge or expertise in some traditional practice (possibly medicine), and those who do have such skills are
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The translation is: "And the location of this stone in a woman's body extends beyond that place for which you intend to remove it; thus there are fears." Here 'seccio' likely refers to an intended removal or treatment (such as surgery) of stones, and expresses concerns about going into areas where these remnants might be. This historical medical text reflects the complexity and challenges faced by practitioners in treating health conditions like gallstones before modern medicine existed.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If it is necessary to cause movement towards water, then take hold of the female healer' extricated with little effort.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	May you lack that item, then seek a skilled midwife or woman present at the birth of women herein discussed in this section.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore take that present, and command it to make all the water you give her go from examination of the sinews to its digestion; which is why check if the woman has pubic hairs, cover her private parts with your hand so she will not want to touch them.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	So if you squeeze that one, command it quickly so that they insert into that place.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If it is not a vein, then the matron commands that her servant inserts his tool into the cavity of the swelling and places it over the bladder, so as to pause the left hand on the bladder; apply therewith good compression.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	So if you crush that, the one who gradually worsens it from within until reaching its peak of pain at midriff level between the joints comes here.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Return it submerged into that position on the hernia of any part where they are standing and centering their body in that division, so that it is not pushed out by the cartilage joint forcefully at once.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section is small at consumption; and place your hand over that part of it according to the amount by which you know the bone has been displaced from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	Be aware that the stones of pepper are seeds: some few and great, as well as lion-shaped, serpentine, elongated, and with ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Thus you know how many spices are needed for what you intend, that which will come forth.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you see flux of blood, adjust it in the glass that has been trissated and place your hand therein until such time as the blood is separated (absceded), then return to your operation within which the skin becomes flushed out.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And prepare you with these instruments for extracting stone from humans, so that your help can be provided in this operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you see phlegm flowing and know that its expulsion is due to obstinate humidity, then stop the placebo over the area and apply this powder and constriction tightness without further action; do not tear it off, for thus the illness will soon disappear.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Return care for the worm (or parasite). In this context, it likely
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Then when the sharpness of pain increases during certain days and nights, it occurs here (referring to location), so you should return to your work within those periods until the stone is expelled. This line suggests a treatment philosophy where moderating activities or movements might help in passing kidney stones more easily if they are causing significant discomfort that worsens at specific times of day, possibly aligning with changes in body temperature due to fever commonly associated with an acute urinary tract condition like nephrolithiasis (kidney stone formation).
Capitol lxii.	Capital LXII suggests the location or section number of a particular document,
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	This phrase indicates that there is content related to an inguinal hernia in this specific part (section
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	An inguinal hernia is not merely an accumulation of moisture in the scrotum where it temporarily houses part of the intestine containing its substance (likely referring to semen). It's called a "scrotal." The sentence implies that, historically or within this textual framework, inguinal hernias were considered as places with fluid build-up in men’thy scrotum due primarily to internal contents like the vas deferens and its associated
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Several veiled signs are on the scrotum's skin where nature prepares itself within this part (likely referring to sperm production), until there is another semen; and it’s not here but in the cushion of the testicles located between the skins of whiteness that we have mentioned before, which serves as a place for something else besides moisture. This line indicates an observation about changes or indications on the scrotum's skin during semen production and suggests these signs are not related to fluid accumulation but rather some other substance possibly associated with sexual functioning within this textual medical tradition, emphasizing that certain conditions of concern should be discerned
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is for debility that you inflict upon those knees, causing it to protrude therefrom; and some are caused by direct impact on the knees with a pointed instrument.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And when the joints for which this addition of water is here: if it' extricate you from whence we have mentioned (the white cistern), then amputation follows a long immersion in shape like a hoe, and appears the genitalia; because moisture comes throughout all.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If there is fluid in the patient's pancreatic tissue, then an abscess forms and leaves from it; as a result, he considers that another organ has ruptured.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If fluid is between the neck of the urethra and the white bladder base, then insert a catheter quickly.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	When you wish to gain knowledge of the color of humidity, look at the moisture that has entered and preceded this condition; as soon as it appears in the traces where it was introduced, its water is observed by you.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	So when we come to the treatment of him who is in iron (which could mean lead poisoning), if it's possible for you to induce vomiting with arsenic, and sometimes administer purgation internally, do so accordingly.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And place it resting on its two sides for any cause or few reasons at once, and pause quickly with the woolen cloths.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Apply yourself to the left side of him/her, and command the servant that follows your right side; he/she extends his arm upwards to reach between the neck vertebrae (cervical spine) and waist joint (abdominal region), as well as at the division of the small intestines.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Return the pillow or bed and divide the neckbone of the body within this length, inside here in the couch:
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And if it is the second painful section felt internally after standing upright away from where the thigh bone lines up with the pubic bone and reaches until you find the white cyst to which a physician can understand, then that's what we are dealing with.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Excise that, and observe carefully so as not to re-injure it; your excision is where you must be attentive because any movement may displace the fragment there which needs delicate observation according to what'se possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	When penetrating deep into the cistern of water is necessary and all the water must be drained out: then pierce deeply through the bladder full of water and remove all the water therein.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Return the separation between their lips and tongue back into place with cuts (incision), extending them outward from below; do not touch the uvula as it is grasped by the tonsils, and incise there where you can manage best.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If the procedure of that wound from his crotch at the time of your operation is necessary, then return it there and adjust the lips of the genitalia' extruded by suture when you have completed the course of treatment, taking care to do so as with other creatures, until he recovers.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	If you have rotted the bowel due to another illness, then take care of what has been mentioned here for treating it, remove the rot and attend to that water which we discussed earlier.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	May it be said that if water is added to any parts of the body, those are hernias; thus know well which part you have felt previously in another limb; and if this appears an operation for you, then perform it there.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line as follows:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Here is the translation line by line:
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	Some measures for this hernia are artificially treated with fine needles at the site of rupture; and you hold thin cautery needles inserted into its belly button area where there is a white bladder containing water, and then take them as follows:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is assembled in Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	When it is necessary to make an incision in that specific area, and then all the moisture will be expelled from there.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Here you apply the sharp lancets, and scrape them off with fine cautery lit, scrubbing away any that remains; do so as much as possible within your control, keeping watch that the flame of the torch does not touch it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	Be aware that this operation is saving and lengthening of blood flow, better than surgery at the heart.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	May you have to perform an incision or drainage at the time of cutting out (or during cauterization), when blood flow is occurrdicted – as your intervention causes it – then attend immediately, in accordance with what has been stated above.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the malady is painful and you do not hope for a second operation due to its horror, then perform an incision as I recommend; when confirmed that we have discussed the significance of these signs, it becomes clear that this hernia is prolapsing (ruptured or bulging).
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	When you cover the malady over any raised area on them (the patient), pierce through the scab in their lower back where they have a spinal column bone, and stop the puncture according to the length of time necessary.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And I have opened wide where the water runs through.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And place your hand over the spot where it was touched and press that upon it to make its return back into the watercourse of blood.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Return that which is inside so it may be healed (the patient).
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	May it be that contrary to water in this hour you perforate through the bladder of the swine: and here no is pain but because of water within, which causes opposition and prohibits the treatment with water or instrument used for extraction; adjust a small one inside the pig.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	E understand that water returns, and it is reabsorbed over a few months or more; when absorbed, according to the doctor's methodology, gout will have passed its days in your body.
Capitol .lxiii.	The given text seems like it could be from an old medical treatise with a mix of
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	It appears that the provided Latin phrase may pertain to treatment or aspects related to "carnous hernia" (which might be interpreted as an obese individual with a
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	The text translates to: "In the section about this carnous hernia, fear is lost in major positions; therefore, I see that you are dismissed from there and saved by it (the treatment)." Here'dictio suggests a perspective where treating or managing certain health issues may lead not only to relief but also unexpected positive outcomes. The Latin phrase seems to imply hope through successful intervention for patients with conditions like hernias, which can be particularly relevant in historical contexts lacking modern medical understanding and resources.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	The provided Latin sentence translates to: "You remember the operation therein and the herbs of aplication." This line refers possibly to an operational procedure related to hernias that is remembered by someone, along
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	The translated English version of the sentence is as follows: "Therefore say that these herbs are applied to those parts whereby our members become strained and they come forth for motions causes such as an acute excessive abundance bursting into genitals, or due to impact." This suggests a traditional understanding in which certain conditions causing discomfort (likely gynecological issues given the reference to 'genetius'—an archaic term possibly referring to female reproductive organs) are treated with specific herbs. The text indicates that these motions may be due either from an immediate and excessive release of bodily fluids or physical tra
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	The translated English version reads: "It is the color of these herbs that corresponds to those parts and it does not abate in them pain, and this treatment (herb application) is severe." Here, the speaker asserts a belief about curative practices wherein colored medicinal concoctions are thought appropriate for
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	When it is loose (or perhaps detached), its blackened state does not have any place in sight here.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And at times it may be due to a knotting of the sinews and inflammation in those joints where already memory has been made aware or through inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	May it be known that when the inflammation of bladder stones occurs upon crushing those very stones, and do not touch them with your hand.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	May that which is painful due to inflammation of the vein not be dispersed from it, and thus receive compression here.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that this specific condition affects the other bones; and you insert the penis of generation into the parts below them, fixating their position with hollowed-out strings attached there, detaching the suspensory ligaments as needed and fixing those already cut.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	So if that meat is already in its solid state, then it's time to remove the meat and introduce moisture into it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	If there is an affinity within the cause of cholera or between them in their vessels, then remove all that affinity and dissolve it by means of round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If it is native flesh in the place behind where you are inserted your tool(s), then insert everything that belongs to him/her and extract with haste as we have done here.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	So when your operation is complete, pour oil and wine over it, then take care that the other remedy enters while it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capitol .lxiv.: This appears to be an annotation or reference in
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	From care for a hernia, which is of the vitals (vital). In this line, it seems that "curacio
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vital is encapsulation as if by some wrapper resembling an oyster shell for the relief of the testicles, and it'thy difficult to perform exercise or walking on that area (hernia). Here, "apostema" likely refers to a form of treatment involving wrapping ("envolucio") similar to placing something inside like in nature - suggesting perhaps some sort of compression garment used for support. This line explains how the intervention is aimed at providing comfort and reducing mobility issues caused by what'
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	In the treatment of this ailment, out of fear for which it was preceded memory (reminiscence). This statement indicates that there may be an underlying concern or psychological factor related to past experiences with similar health issues ("malautia") driving attention towards preventing its
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	But if we speak against the second which overthrew the first, indicating a comparison of treatments or approaches where one method may have been less effective than another previously tried ("oppieracio" refers to an alternative treatment that seems not as successful in
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	Tell that in treating the hernia above it (referring to putting pressure on the area where the hernia is), elevate a pillow or cushion; and position testicular suspenders at body parts near immediately afterwards, with genital bands tightened over breasts which have been tested for fitness. Hold those other ministers that you do—and extend them vigorously (Herein lies the practical advice on managing hernia symptoms or preventing recurrence). The use of a pillow to elevate ("sobre") and apply pressure may suggest immobilization techniques, while positioning "testicular suspenders" likely refers to some form of support garment. Tightening genital bands indicates the need for snug-fitting undergarments that offer additional abdominal compression or containment—possibly intended as a preventative measure against hernia recurrence after initial treatment, all while maintaining vigorous movement ("ext
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	When you insert an iron needle along this section through the middle of your legs, where these vessels have been discovered within that area.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Expose all parts where we have extracted them from the furnace, and this scraping should be done with exorcism tools for each of those areas in our temple (the body).
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Here comes the line to translate: E propici in quelle quella spilla duplice nel quale sia fello dòvulo, e la qual lo ponemo al primo dei luoghi dove acido si accida, ed altre volta nella parte posteriore di loro.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Return those within the warmth of this place by section in four parts according to length, and extract what is added due to fresh or decayed feces.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Then apply care for this child'thy ailment by caring for other diseases from which they may suffer and that cause urine discharge not once in two generations; it is not bad as such things are concerned with health.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	May you inflict pain on all the vessels, provided that their testicles are thrust out or pushed into them by water, depriving them of nourishment and causing them to become inflamed, in order that they may not be well for these reasons.
Capitol .lxv.	The provided text is written in Medieval Latin with some archaic language structures that have
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	From the treatment of an intestinal protrusion (herniation).
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The appearance of this hernia is due to a section that extends over the stomach from various parts of its belly chamber, through which if those clogs reach towards the other ends of these blockages, then it appears as such.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This rupture is either of the cistern or due to excretion from it, and these organs are inflamed for various reasons: because of pressure (percussio), by crushing (sautus), through bleeding (clamor), rising upwards as a result of some grave cause (elevaciō), or merely in appearance.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When the humoral fluid exits due to contraction of the chest, it becomes diluted slowly over long periods and does not become weakened, instead entering into the pleural cavity through the space created by the collapsed lung.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	When the patient'dict breath enters in sections of the chest cavity, it happens suddenly with intense pain; various symptoms appear on the seemingly protected spine, and this is due to inflammation of the intestines (budel), affecting mainly the parts farthest from the navel within the abdominal area.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Some movements cause distension of the intestine (belly), and it is called this intestinal protrusion here.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Some winds cause pain and some rush into the opened part of the intestine, where they are retained, due to a great deficiency in the humors (bodily fluids) of the uterus, causing severe and increasingly intense pain when pressure is applied.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of these spices for this illness we fear that they might be avoided in this place.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The given medieval medical text translates to English as follows:
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English:
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	If it is within your power that from that hole something can come out,
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And return it externally for the treatment of those parts where its stone has been discovered within the scrotum'thy corded structures.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	When you insert the tube into that which surrounds the testicle, within where there is white fluff (the scrotum), and between where it joins the body'dicta (groin/inguinal region). This releases any adherence present in that part behind the hood.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Return the testicles to their parts above, and lift up the white phlegm in them on your left side, and raise it towards the part of the chest; command the minister (a servant or assistant) that extend this throughout you both bodily regions, dissolving what is behind at the back position.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	When it concerns those pains in the joints that have not any cause within the white membrane encapsulating them,
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause within yourself (inside), then bury it deep in its place inside your belly now.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Here encircles the limbs and these are held tightly in such a way that none of the vessels within cannot exert any cause for decay to come forth from here, preventing osteomyelitis (osteoabscess).
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And after another restraint has been applied for three days following the first one at this forum, bind these two straps around the area where the cords are placed close to the testicles and measure everything according to roundness; then fix it with ligatures here below.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomdat en aquo que havem dit.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And administer the wool soaked in oil, and pause on dirt; apply the thread which we have prepared (and some of them are branded with white cauterizing pins to prevent bodily fluid flow, for fear that movements will cause these), and let the thread enter where it can fall by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	May it be that if the bathing of you is delayed, pour water down your throat quickly and place over there where they fall as soon as we have spoken.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	When one cures it is with the other remedy for diseases within, where such has been healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	The provided text appears as if it is written in an archaic or historically flav
De hernia ventosa.	It seems like you're referring to "herniated diaphragm
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	The provided text in your previous message appears as if it is written or translated into a form of archaic Spanish, possibly influenced by Latin languages given the mix and old grammar structures you've used:
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	Here come the first sentences to translate:
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And when it is time for healing as we have discussed, then take care of it accordingly.
Capitol .lxvii.	The given text is not entirely intelligible as it seems to be written in a mix of old Rom
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Given the fragmented and archaic nature of this phrase, translating accurately can be challenging without additional context or clarification on grammar rules used in that specific medieval
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	The provided text appears to discuss a situation involving the breaking of ribs with possibly some medical implications or observations:
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	Ne do not let any cause of the humors enter into the liver; and if they do exist, it is little or nothing, return to them at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the time of water persists, then there is an adjusted fissure within the cistern; and by extending the cistern'dictly (presumably referring to some form of hydraulic or fluid pressure), it causes expansion of the cistern itself—this leads to softening both where points are made on said location, which relaxes its state.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	The treatment of him is with pointed cautery as it has been previously described for him.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And in some cases it is healed by iron according to this methodology: and when the swelling of the womb rests on its two parts, they dry out the rupture site at the neck of the uterus following a quantity of three days.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	Return strength to the white thread that is within the cushion where it has been discovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Return and place that bone above the prominent area of the chestbone, pressing it against the belly button.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	Return (or adjust) their limbs over the extremity of the right side rib and tie with one thread from these two together.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Return the limb' extruded part back into its place and do not insert it completely inside or outside of the cystic area in total; nor should you extend your hand, as this will help you understand how to treat an intestinal hernia during recovery.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And in this place, they are placed better for healing. (The term "cauterize" refers here not necessarily as an act of burning but rather using the tool or method with precision and intention towards recovery.)
Capitol .lxviii.	Here is a line-bydependent translation:  
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of semen regulation of the scrotum'supra-genital region or above (testicles). Here is a line by line translation
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	 The semen of the scrotum in men is softened through it being moistened by intermittent bouts (suggesting a natural process or treatment), and this indicates careful attention to its management/observation. Here's an English translation:  
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Now it is necessary for that person who cares about the patient'thy jewel, and has softened his belly upon its natural navel; furthermore adjust both lips with stitching on them:
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	If you wish, in the meal preparation there is an excess of softened bowel that has been cooked three or four times and it requires stitching to be firmly closed.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Return your attention between the sutures, and apply care for other afflictions within to heal them and make fields (skin) healthy again.
Capitol .lxix.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any text for translation but appears as
De castracio.	The Latin term provided, "de castracio," can
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	From the Latin text provided about castration and its place in law: "Castratio within our laws is condemned; yet here I recall this matter freely since it may be required by cause for my reasons (which include two main considerations); first, to ensure that whatever action taken concerning these matters falls under medical knowledge when examined or treated by a physician—this reflects the understanding of their treatment. Secondly, we are compelled at times to perform castration on other animals as well: for cattle and horses just like humans (as in chastity), dogs and pigs if necessary (like restraining mobility) similarly; also includes cases with resemblances between human bes
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	So it is said that gonorrhea occurs in two ways: through withdrawal or by breaking into segments.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the case where it is caused by inward pull, the method of operation we perform involves submerging the creature' extrinsic parts within water as long as its glands have softened and become limp so that they hang downwards.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Return these things into your hand so that they become solutions and do not appear suddenly during handling.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	May pain occur in castration or obstruction because you hold the beast and press on its scrotum down to his left side.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Return the shoulder straps (or supports), and inspect each section within which two legs pass through.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Return those putrid fluids that you have caused within; they must be cleansed from inside out.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not lay upon those of the chest any cause but rather place it under the waters below (or simply rest beneath them), where its subtle essence resides within the fluids.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This discharge from the scrotum is better than this illness, for inflammation therein may stem as a cause of desire in animals to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Return care for what is inside that must be healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Given that "Capitol" is not immediately recognizable as Latin or
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	The phrase you provided, "De la cura de hermafrodozia," seems to be in Italian and transl
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	The Italian text discusses two kinds of hermaphroditism in men:
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	When some of that which flows in the urethra enters into the area where the testicles are, it is as follows:
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	May also be found in the women: for it is that, like two testicles of man with only a few threads from each side at the pubis joint are together there as they are on top of the penile part.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure involves three kinds of remedies: two from men and one derived from women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And that you insert those bones adjusted into where they escape from there (referring possibly to an injury or displacement), and take care of their other ailments as well.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second species of men where semen is produced in the region of the testicles, there is neither cure nor opposition within them.
Capitol .xxi.	The provided text appears to be instructional in nature, likely discussing medical procedures
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	From slowing down the movement and affect on flesh due to women's reasons (or conditions). This sentence seems like a Latin translation of an older concept or observation about health, possibly from
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Adjusted appropriately for natural causes within which it is essential and must be observed, with some recommendations being heightened in women to such an extent that they are shared like men's conditions during sexual intercourse. This text appears to discuss the medical guidance related to bodily functions (specifically lingerie or attire adjustments) for health reasons within natural causes—emphasizing observation and certain behaviors expected of some individuals, particularly women, in relation to sex.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Now when you grasp excess moisture from your own body or onions and garlic, with the aid of hands (or possibly instruments), this is being performed for purification purposes.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And when it does not come into conclusion inside, mainly in the small of the backbone, so that there is no flow of blood:
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Return care for that which has been cared for by poultice within it must be taken until healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	May unborn meat is the flesh that does not exist within a woman'thy abdomen until it overflows therein; hence why we must discover when and how long beforehand so as to begin treatment timely, for cure once healed inside her womb (and by calling this 'malady of excess'). Thus let us note the duration at which signs appear within parts comparable to a rope's strands.
Capitol .lxxii.	The provided text appears incomplete for translation as it only consists of fragments without context or complete sentences
De curacio de alratica.	It seems like you've shared a fragment in Latin, which translates to "For
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	The provided text snippet from medieval medical terminology is:
E es o natural o accidental.	It is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	In an accident caused by illness, and that pain is either due to improperly aligned or misaligned bones or joints (carn nadechida) or subtle/hidden issues (cipha).
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	Here comes the sentence to translate:
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	When the ailment is known by observation of the doctor'sin practice, then attend to it promptly; if not immediately visible, seek that place or area where symptoms tend towards those points above and below them (or around there), hold their hands in such way.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If it is due to subtle cobwebs (which may refer to parasites or small obstructions), and it belongs to the mouth'thy lips area—then use your finger and break that obstruction away from you.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	When pressure is applied over the sores on the lips and when bite marks are also indicated in these areas by more swelling,
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The woman is above her two, with extended thighs and lips forced out so that the fine needle can be inserted below it, relethy to release the obstruction and dislodge the olive (the term used for a gallstone).
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return wool and linen in oil and place it on that spot, and let grease be at home for today so that this area is not healed overnight.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the scab is thick and dense, then you must insert that thorn or blackthorn bark into it.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	May it be if the disease is due to meat consumption, then suspend that one and incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	When these are the remedies you use to stop the flow of pus infection and gout, blood clots, adjust with an albumen mixture.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	When they administer a broad iron needle for that dirt does not harden into lead within the body.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Translation line by line:
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And let it be healed by other convalescence care within which it will recover its health.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And some bruises appear on other parts of the body during childbirth, and they should be examined according to this methodology.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If it is due to an apoplexy of the skull (which could refer to a brain injury or stroke), there should be no contraindthy in any manner, for these are actions that may worsen the situation.
Capitol .lxxiii.	The provided text appears to be from an ancient medical document discussing treatment methods for joint pain
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Regarding the cure of hemorrhoids and boils in the vagina, here is a translation:
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: From that through which these veins flow, arises continued discharge of urine; and when such blockages occur (urethral stones), they are painful pus-filled structures.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And in this division of those things and their joints, he has directed which receive care and which do not receive it.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Thus it is said that hemorrhoids and thrombosis occur in the womb of the mother where they do not appear to be cured by iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	May those that are healed on the mother'thy bed of feelings hold such sentiments and they shall be those who recover.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	When you place the woman in moisture and extend her legs or dress her with coarse fabric, and then mark those areas on their skin, it indicates where there are humors accumulated excessively.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return powder over those whereby their fistula'dict (inscribed) wounds exude fluidity; apply as much soreness and appearance therapy thereunto.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Return your feet into stockings for an hour, and return them afterwards in cool water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the flow of blood persists, then take that which collects in sediment and runoff from millstones and gold dust and resembles gemstones.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Return bread and honey, mixing it with water (and/or wine), then apply this paste on both of the patient's limbs.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the sanction is detached, then bleed it out (possibly referring to removing pus or other effluvia); if not, rub vigorously with two hands and perform scraping on the breasts.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return wool and immerse that which is extracted from bones, or gore juice (from barley), or fermented grain extract in water until it adheres to the place; apply care so that this substance remains moistened within where healing occurs.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May Athys request that which requires stern attention, for you have observed what I mentioned earlier in this letter.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Cure that which is within it has been healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	The provided text seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise with elements of
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Based on the fragments you've given and considering that they seem to be in or related to Old Spanish (which evolved into modern-dictions like Italian, Catalan
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	The provided text appears to describe various symptoms and conditions related to what seems like an emergency situation involving worms, ulcerations, abscesses (collections of pus), fistulas (abnormal passages or openings in the body wall that form a connection between internal organs and external surface through surgical intervention often needed when there are persistent problems with fluid discharge from these sites after they heal naturally).
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And you have already spoken about these illnesses and their respective remedies in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Now consider if the pain from apendicitis in your patient is sharp and accompanied by rebound tendernthy and fever; when pressed, it hurts even more but does not cause perforation of the organ, for which treatment will help until the inflammation subsides.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And when you make a couch for the woman using boards that have been given to her; let her lie on it so that her shoulders rest on one of its parts just below the stomach area, spread out her hips and adjust her weight accordingly, pause her breasts gently with hands, holding each breast as needed.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And place the midwife straight and use the tool to which she has opened up (the patient's space), in accordance with those causes that will require it.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	When you intend to administer this tool while keeping it close to the patient' extraterrestrial body (assuming 'preon of the lady/woman'), only its own extremity and lead should enter into her womb.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the tool is larger than the mother of the patient's womb, then you must pause on the texture of the maternal womb so that it prevents the entirety of the implement from entering the maternal womb.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: When you pause the flow that runs through the instrument below and hold it with your tongue, twist the flow until it overflows into the maiden'dict (likely referring to a woman’s body or uterus).
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When excitement appears and is touched on the hand and face, it forces you to restrain that part of the body with a pillow under your head (the "spine").
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	When the sickness is evacuated, then you pause in the dirt or oil immersed therein where some secretion remains; and cease bleeding within the section before mother'thy breast.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And keep a pause for the mother and clean woollen blanket soaked in water, where they have been boiled within (probably referring to some form of bath or treatment using these items).
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Return it shall be cured within two days with this that has been put inside wherein health is restored, which means when the object placed for healing enters and ensures recovery of health in about two days. (Here's a line-bymediate translation: Return it will be healed within two
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Here are some washes for the mother and child wherein soap is melted in water along with honey or molasses; into which they immerse themselves to be bathed until their skin feels refreshed from long, lengthy lathering (translation: Here there will be baths using a mixture of melting down soaps dissolved in water and sweeteners like honey. They'll immerse or bathe within this liquid where they can feel the prolongation on their skins).
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the child is bitten in the swolthy (enlarged) vein and you are forbidden from treating it here at home, they have medicine for that which we discussed earlier today.
Capitol .lxxv.	Based on your provided text snippets which seem reminiscent of early modern medical
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	The sentence appears to be a mix between English, Latin and potentially other medieval languages or dialects with phonetic liberties typically found in non-standardized historical spellings of these tongues. The text suggests an instruction related to midwifery (matronas) concerning breech birth (bius sian medicatz), which was a
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	The provided text seems to be a complex and difficult medieval medical Latin that describes the process of dealing with breech births—when an infant is born bottom or buttocks first rather than headfirst, which was considered unnatural at the time (enfantement natural). The sentence suggests procedures for midwives ('matronas'), including:
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore when you press those thighs, let the patient'dict belly be compressed so that their unborn child can continue to develop inside until it reaches its head above the neck, and give them a second dose of good purifying medication.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	May those parts that are not natural and cannot be cured appear when the patient suffers from pain in their feet and head, wherein one of them is atop the head or between the legs (or chest), with a single mass around it; they become inflated over your own colonne, resembling figures you yourself can'thy to make.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	Where necessary is it that there be a wise and subtle lady who oversees all these matters, keeping guard against error and deceit.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	When presenting in its entirety those aspects of them therein and within which that signifies for you as well being above water (or balanced), indicating the patient'thy overall state at this time with respect to their bodily humors, possibly related to fluid balance or phlegm levels.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the foot hurts on its head for a natural reason and it is painful therein, especially in women where they become weakened (and their blood becomes thin) from fenugreek seeds and olive oil infusions, that servant takes what these women hold onto.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Here the physician inserts a metal instrument between their small intestine and hole therein, or alternatively compresses that part where fluid accumulation occurs due to moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	When you press the woman'dict abdomen so that childbirth occurs.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If not done already, then cover the woman with moistened wool and honey poultice (a healing dressing made of these ingredients).
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquella stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	If more of your flesh is exposed at the entrance due to cutting it open, then you must carefully reduce those pieces little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If she does not obey the inside (the treatment or medication), then lift her onto a couch and remove the feet from under her, placing the couch on the ground; hence the woman must be held firmly to prevent falling due to excitement.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If the bands are not drawn tightly and fall downwards, then you must examine those areas and remove them from undernethy there or between their body parts where they fell in place with linen draped over it; these have been removed by a midwife (a female medical practitioner).
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of childbirth upon her feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the belly is on top of their feet, then you push them down so that they are small and contracted therein; also grasp one foot and stretch those little ones out gradually.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When he is inside the thighs, then you command him to express himself and make that opening part of his constitution, provided if God wills it so.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	If there is no water left that has been recommended by the doctor, then return your fetus gradually within where you have paused this second figure of nature; and at that point they will perform their excretion.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	If it is prohibited that any water which we have retempered remains within us, then take muslin and dissolved gum, and grind them thoroughly in the mortar for good percussion, apply lines of this mixture to the woman'thy abdomen (the belly), where there may be pus below.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Here is the translation line by line for your medieval medical treatise text in English:
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	When parts of it (the body) are softened and become moist due to the influence of mint and resting that area under its application.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	When you submerge it under the fumigation for an hour, then apply pressure on one of its segments with a cloth and extend their mouth outward while lifting from below (the lower part of their abdomen), where they will feel relief upon leaving that position in such manner.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Eye examination of the fetus in its membranes and skin.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus exits in this manner, you engage gradually with each part; and ensure that the woman stays bent over her knees, keeping her feet planted firmly on the ground, while those parts are supported above, continuing to complete their positioning.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Here comes the line to translate: Return him gently on his belly, one by one and take out what has entered into their legs from between which it is prepared in advance as quickly as possible.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the fetus is not yet born, then lift their feet and move them strongly, and place water above each small intestine within until the fetus enters its parts (i.dict this means that you should stimulate the movement of pregnant women's bodies with gentle movements to encourage childbirth).
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Return your hand and gently ease the little fetus into its hole gradually, commanding the woman to express herself within where the fetus is situated.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Evening examination languidly hanging one of its hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	When it is in reduction of her size (presumably referring to a swolthy or distended area), if you cannot achieve that yourself, then lift the woman and assist with reducing it there.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If it cannot be moved, place the joint on the bed and forcefully press the thighs together with violence, and administer the ligaments that you have previously mixed from mucilage (a viscous substance often used in traditional medicine).
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If childbirth has come upon her (the patient), then she shall take the seat on the bed and study about reducing the belly, make the female form its second natural shape again, and instruct it to return into itself through a hole that is already made for this purpose.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Evening expansion of the belly and its flesh are at two from their mother'dicts.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	When the matron holds her hand on the belly and gently turns that little thing over bit by bit, it makes things easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	When one is in great pain and rests on the bed where they have been recommended oil and mucilage to be applied for relief,
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Exitus of fetus prepared over the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the uterus expels violently according to this menstruation phase, and you notice it within your grasp (the womb), then inspect the second one inside where excess moisture can be purged from using your finger in there.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	If the fetus is hanging on the face and neck of the patient, then you cut that part of the umbilicus to prevent it from being retained or delayed.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Here is the line by line translation of each sentence into English:
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of twins or fetuses from multiple.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You know that the joints are rubbed frequently and sometimes up to three or four times a day, which may be strange or unnatural, perhaps due to illness, but it is part of their natural life.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Given the medieval context and attempt to understand words that are somewhat similar across Italian, Spanish, French, and Latin influences, here is a possible translation of each line into English:
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	If it is difficult for them to bear their burdens and they come upon us with shapes not natural, then take care of those loads as we have described.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	If the midwife is subtle and gentle in her application of water (likely some form of therapy or massage), making things easier with delicacy, speeding up recovery according to how prepared you are for healing as whole figure by this wise woman guiding towards health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of what formed within the womb and was aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some occur in the month of May one to three or four times and five up to ten instances each, which I must verify if a woman has had an abortion (five) or another nine formations occurred, causing pain by measurement from esteemed scholistic physicians.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	Here comes the entire line translated into English:
Capitol .lxxvi.	The text provided seems to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discussing
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	When translated line by line into English, the Latin-influenced sentence about postmortem extraction would
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When translated into English:  
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	And when the woman is lying on her back and her head inclines downward while her hips are raised, so it should be done for health reasons as per medical practice in those times.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister takes hold of that limb or the one tied in the bed, to ensure that the patient's body does not extend further and extraction (removal) is necessary from the fetus (the unborn child).
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Return your own moistened mouth with oil of honey and mycelium of alfalfa and lent seed, which are the essence that holds them together.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Here the midwife places her hand above their oils and mucus secretions, puts pressure on where they have fluid discharge in the uterus area to keep the stitches there.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: At a suitable location in water: therefore you consider if the fetus is prepared for it to be placed on its head, or keep their fingers locked into his hips, or onto his chest, or under his tongue, or atop of his jawbones and any other proper locations thereof.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	May it be upon his feet, then in the groin or between the ribs on their back,
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And place another cushion on them if necessary, or the third one as needed, to keep their pelvis anchored and not extended too much by sole reliance on the backbone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	Now that all is prepared for him/her, so that the purification of him/her can be done as desired in one toothache.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	So if the patient' extrusion is caused (has occurred), then bind them securely to where they have been placed, and thus ensure that the entire body returns in place.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If there is an abscess on the other side as well and it cannot be reduced through pressure of your hand upon that area; then take out that one inside so that everything comes outside, and inspect what you have removed either at the place where your hand was or in the groin.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	When you cover in the other part of the body and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the fetus is large, or if it's constricted in labor, cover that which thrust between the dilation and fissure at the head, insert an instrument named "aludat", whose form will derive from those forms found on other instruments for this purpose.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	It appears that the text is written in an archaic form of Romance languages with some Latin influence, which makes it challenging to translate without significant expertise in medieval linguistics or medical terminology from this period and region. Nevertheless, I'll attempt a rough translation based on recognizable elements:
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the head is sick and compressed by the breastbone, then it has been opened into wherein the moisture that exists in the chest has become released/liberated.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	May it not become complicated and do not eat excessively; if so, then cut the head as soon as you can within your power.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If a hole is found in the abdomen or it descends into its cavity, then you must pierce that which contains the moisture within it.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If it is on their feet, then the attraction of you to them will be light and in your direction towards their mouth will also be light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	May it be that you have squeezed the belly and chest where there lies clothing wrapped around your body; remove what is outside so that water can flow through those areas which are bound by such material at this time.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	May if the other members are bent and turn back their head; may if the patient's mouth is open wide, insert it into its chest region below her shoulder blade; then pinch that area with a finger or fingers (one or two), and thrust them down to where they enter inside the woman’thy mouth.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	If the mouth of the woman is constricted by apendicitis and you must lance it, do so carefully to avoid causing her pain thereon; above all, administer drainage for causes of wet greasy humors then:
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Embrace bandages; follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If it is on his chest, then if possible, make an incision with a sharp instrument: and administer the medicine we have mentioned for him.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If it is not possible, then be inserted into pillows and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	When no cause of secondary illness is found.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	When you have completed all of your treatment, then administer what we have discussed for the medicated cuffs that I've fastened on which ache from the mother (i.dict patient).
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If you have an outflow of bile, then direct it into clear, fast-moving waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And you have already seen a woman in her womb who was pregnant again, and placed one on that foreconceived child, which is also another being within her.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	Occasionally an abscess has been present within the patient's limb for a long time, and it enters into swelling that affects both arms.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And when it is called for healing of him/her, and has been treated long time ago, the child does not get solidified (or mature).
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Now you hold it over some hard-pressed bands of forceful compression, and strike an arm bone with a stone or similar tool for several days on high fevered nights; so much that there is not room left in the belly for such heavy object!
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And so you consider that they are bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	So then you clothe the patient in linen and extract limestone stones from their intestines where women exist within them, having done so for a long time; correcting it by means of a small bracelet (brace).
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And you do not affirm oneself to be strange but in water there is knowledge and help that the doctor applies for healing through care.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the instruments necessary for extracting the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of returning in which she is brought out:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is how one becomes strained in which two limbs are bound together: with these bindings on the ends of both feet'thy hands serve as supports/props for each other, thus binding them tightly and promoting healing through immobilization. (Note that some phrases may not have exact modern English equivalents due to historical differences in medical terminology.)
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	Whenever this virtue is subtle as straps and either flesh or wood from trees,
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	These two additions are placed in the mouth of the mother so that she can take them when you rotate the given medicines provided.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another appearance of that subtle and light substance has appeared below it:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It is pain caused by iron or boars according to the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	When in that limb two additional times are added with pauses between each addition and the length of those additions is a hand'dictate their height to be two fingers high.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	When you wish for these chambers to be opened by the master (doctor), then make sure that a woman is placed on her back with weights hanging downwards; this will open what there already exists between their thighs, where some fluid has accumulated within them.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Place your hand over the instrument you use for cutting, as much as desired by the judgment of the mother within where it is set up in accordance with preference.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The method by which they turned things around in old times is as follows:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of pressure applied by which he pushes down on the fetus:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of friendship that he has come across with which he knows (the big head).
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And when it is assembled with forceps in the extremity, occasionally and sometimes several times using this method, as done previously with these instruments where they grasped and counted on them.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of healing few times or infrequently:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The shape of an arrowhead has a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Shape of an ulcer has nails/spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The form of forceps with which your head is held contains wherein the head of the fetus lies.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of scab has two ends at which the head is detached:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two shields in Latin:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are used, and when their quantities increase as they prepare them for the patient' extrication process, place some on her bed and others with your hands according to quantity required.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And when it is necessary for those instruments not to work (here), there is no exemption from this necessity.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the second extraction (assuming "De" is a preposition meaning 'from' or 'of', similar
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	 When the second extract is grasped tightly by the patient, you must command the illness that holds it to release their appendix (assuming "segondina" refers to an inflamed organ or area within context), and perform a careful retraction with your forceps; press firmly on its mouth and nostries so if through this action they expel what'sin inside, be content.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	If not, then take a warm bath and pierce through the cover with a disruption tool, pause in that burning herb where the mother'thy mouth is soothed by calamus and fennel seeds, rue and clove oil, and cassia bark.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water within the wave and placed upon the flame.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And place one end of the catheter in the mouth of the woman, and insert that into where her vomit collects inside the womb.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	When that particular swelling has appeared as mentioned earlier, and its reduction proceeds quickly (swiftly), then...
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	May if you wish to proceed with this treatment and avoid surgery, then command the matrona to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or rosewater bathing (infusion), and have it inserted into his/her navel; as soon as that has been done, insert your second one thereafter according to what we recommend. If you choose a method within the mother's womb today, then place said secondary intervention inside just like before so that the midwife does not forcefully assist in childbirth delivery when she sees it; remove her gently afterward by pulling out small sections at a time until completion occurs.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before it is permitted at the sides of the hips for ease and comfort (When one allows adjustment or movement at the hip joints, this can provide relief from discomfort).
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	When adjusting its contact amount, it listens and avoids attachment.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the mother'thy mouth is constricted, we have already prepared the cautery and medical care of water from wells or medicinal herbs for treatment.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	May not all causes recommended be followed, and keep watch lest you touch that which is in iteration (repeating or cyclical), but if someone from it comes into the mouth of the woman, cover that with cloth and take four medicines; these will purify her for clean days ahead and dissolve any remaining embarrassment.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When the potion is taken and it raises the evil within them (the patient), both in the head and stomach, then when they have been administered under smoke purification methods that are suitable for such an illness;
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	May those of Antiques come under fumigation with nitre and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of this tool through which a woman is subjected retains menstrual blood and the second womb fluid, herein lies their hands.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Suffering is of bone or sinew.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	When the subtle part is below in the chest and the extensive part above the focus, and the underflowing humidity is stopped beneath the ribs of the foci,
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And now take that tongue into which some of that underflow has been ingested, and repeat this process again.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of treating an unharmed child' extramammary (outside of the breast) region; not pierced or perforated through surgical
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	 From what I can discern from the medieval text you've provided (which appears to be in a pseudo-Latin or an archaic form of Romance languages), and attempting to interpret your question about "Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforat," it seems like there might have been
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Indeed, the text suggests that if not treated by his/her own lady (matrona), then he shall pierce it himself with a sharp implement (possibly an aglet or lancet used in medieval times for lancing wounds). The caution is added to ensure that one does not touch any raw flesh, likely indicating concern about contamination and the spread of disease.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And place it over that cloth soaked in wine and oil, and take care of the wax inside where there is contained within it.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear that it is dilated (possibly referring to a swolthy or bloated body part), then pause in the throat with a catheter for days and observe when the child will start discomfort/complain.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And you have constricted the pupil of the patient' extramundane for purgation or putrefaction; hence, once that this consolidation is set in place, take care with what we had said about its treatment and lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	From treatment for those ulcers that come upon us suddenly.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Lumps that occur in the lower junction of connection and larger parts, which come from behind or within one section'thy connections:
E es una fistula o motas.	When it is a fistula or abscess.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	When that ancient connection is dry and out of moisture white or subtlety poured, some measures are taken for these ulcers.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	Those penetrating ones are guarded by this water that it comes in and out of them; some even employ the medicine for exits, and others suffer from these same pains.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	From those fistulas occasionally present within the bladder space, and entering into the flesh of the testicle; from those that enter at the junction of the scrotum and the thigh:
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	When a catheter (the "tie" mentioned here) is inserted into the anus and does not penetrate, it means you place it in the anus itself, inserting delicate or iron instruments through the fistula when there'thy no discomfort.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If in that dislocation the humors enter under such subtle attempts of lead or fur from a horse within which you feel the attempt or touch on your thigh,
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you do not feel that sensation in all of it nor proceed any cause of digestion or worms and windiness, as we have said before, then know that it is non-permeable, and thus take care for yourself.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the prostate, it signifies that its purpose is to expel urine from there and thus make this location medicine'thy for curative purposes.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	May it enter the juncture of the thigh or into the bone and incite pain throughout the circuit, then its name is that which seeks to enter here if not already within the bone, causing further pain upon entering this part; and such requires immediate treatment with purgatives. And none can heal it therewith nor by waxing sealed.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	In all those perforating sores there is not a complete cure; their healing and weakening work upon the humors, which they firmly hold within them.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	May heal as hoped for if it is not piercing and does not age soon, cure by iron according to your recommendation, which has already been administered, so that nothing further needs addition.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	If that individual feels pain from within their colon expanding into the rectum, immediately insert your finger to relieve them in the rectum.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If you feel the toe trying to push through and as such sense something between your thighs (and possibly that which is penetrating), be certain that it is indeed penetrant; hence do not attempt in those places where there'thy no healing, for we have spoken of them.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	May there also arise among those who are healthy in sound bodies such individuals as these.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the attempt enters and does not penetrate to where it is in the belly, between that which serves as hope for flesh or bone, and a fistula forms on its surface within this place, dry out the navel of the wound's extremity with dampness; once done so at the site of the attempt, let moisture enter through there to where the limb tip is located. And thusly will you free it from and heal (the attempted entrance).
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	Return mercury (or some form of quicksilver, often used in medical treatments for its purported antiseptic properties) to those clogged veins where they have been assembled together with a penis needle and do not break apart from any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	May the flow of pus sometimes enter between you and your body cavity when those parts are inside it; then, with instruments for purulent inflammation or acute medicine at hand, cauterization is applied either to that area where these swollen bodies have been adjusted, achieving detoxification, as well as the abscess exudate.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	When treatments with stoppage and execution are used, once restored the patient is healed and does not fear repetition.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	May it be that the fistula has entered into the belly of a person and is lengthened on the surface of their body; then insert your finger therein at its location, to investigate further within.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	Therefore if cent scores of flesh and between you and her it is covered by tissue or meat, then intervention cannot be performed there but rather through a second route based on trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The given text is a medieval medical treatise in Latin-influenced language discussing the treatment of certain conditions:
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert into that faithful covering of flesh or surrounding these, and attempt to insert the foot within the fistula whereby continuation is achieved for it.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	May if it penetrates into the margin of the anus propoundingly inserted, then remove that foreign object from where you have thrust it inwardly; extract its tip and adjust both ends accordingly, applying pressure to each one for a day or two until possible recurrence of insertion. Whenever more frequently inserts itself back inside the body, tighten into place those flesh portions between which this end enters (i.e., where fingers meet anus).
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	When proper care is given so that it becomes solidified and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it so in whatever manner you have prepared, but do not insert anything into it unless necessary to prevent falling out of place (le lacert). Only attempt this after ensuring that which is inside has been healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spine is what forms the fistula; its curve is sharp and the other division is smooth, therefore it's not necessary to insert anything unless needed sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	From the seam of hemorrhoids where blood flows within that area.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras," either between the buttocks seemingly made of flesh or where those are composed like bread with grease, these two places serve as their passageways for waste materials.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	From those small and large, which come from the joints of those limbs during heats (which is one), and movements/motions, and outside the body cavity, in the extremities of the patient:
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	Even though there are those whose buttocks protrude due to little moisture in the body cavity, where yellow water or a small drop of sanctus wine continues flowing constantly and according to the color of the body, it is observed accordingly.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which has been inserted into the colon is to command the humors (or pus) within it so they settle and appear at your location, where you can attend to them.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Now you bite and clench your teeth around the part where those are held by your tongue, and apply pressure to their reasons with that same tongue.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the unguis is not tightened in those places due to their moisture, then take these ashes or a sharp sponge or wool cloth and cleanse them there; also powder some of that ash on the incision for they are at risk where cauterization takes place. Or apply it according to what precedes in the process of cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	Return that same care for those things within which they have been healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the belly does not heed expulsion (reflux or vomiting), then crush and wash in that water which is present in the colon, whereupon it will aid to prevent reflux emanation when the bowel squeezes.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	May if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is humidity or dampness, and it's necessary to grasp those with your finger nails (or thumbnails), insert them, and take care of these things until they have been healed inside where we mentioned.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	Here is the translation line by line:
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	When it is necessary for all of them (humors) and not just that one which should be expelled from the body, thus allowing excess humoral fluid to drain from that particular source.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place your hand over the buttocks, dipped in oil or clay; and there it rests on the colon, commanding the humors to stop their flow.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	When you place it inside that box; and when it is healed, take care of those bound with wax or other curative medication within the said box.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of treating ulcers (or abscesses). Here is the translation line by line into English
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	 Of cleaning wounds either through dryness of a crack or due to foreign bodies (nature). Here is the translation: "Of treating ulcers whether they are caused by the drying out of a crack, or because of objects from nature." In this
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	 When they are ancient and of no value in that medicine, then you must break open the hardened stone or your own wax seal inside which there are already dry points infected with pus from below; this prevents them from healing (consolidating). Here is the translation: "When these ulcers have become old and useless according to medical standards, one should carefully crack a fistula stone or their personal antiseptic wax seal inside which dried out infection points exist—this action hinders any attempt for them to heal (consolidate). Here is the translation: "When these ulcers have become ancient and not beneficial according to medical principles, one must diligently break open a fistula stone or their own antiseptic wax seal where dried infection points exist—this action prevents any attempt at healing (consolidating)." Here is the translation for "De curacio de fistulas":
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Break open those that are full of violent purulent matter and have been scalded, and care for those that have already healed within them (in this context). Here is the translation: "Break open those ulcers with a strong infection inside that were first burned or scalded; attend to those ones now cleanly sealed." This line indicates an action directed towards treating infected and damaged areas of fistulas, suggesting breaking them apart (in this case possibly referring metapthyically
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of poultice application, it is essential.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Understand that when the limb is closed and not swolthy (thickened), observe its color at the end of closing it up; feverishness occurs throughout the body and mainly in the joints of the feet and knees, for which gloves are needed due to these pains.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And when the fluid has entered into the joint and is lodged in its crevices or bursae (the lubricating sacs around some of our body's movable joints), it must be removed entirely from there, and proper care should then follow for that area.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	If you wish, cauterize the second one that precedes in his chest.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	May small ulcers appear rough and rounded on the surface of the body, and they often come about in children most frequently.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	In caring for him/her is to extend and insert that which will hold faithfully or within the enclosed space you have created with it.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	If you wish, then burn it as we have said earlier, at the focus or in acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And now everything has been removed with respect to in and out using that same tool which you directed earlier.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	May small or tortuous worm be prominent on the surface of the body in general and when it is crushed therein, it causes pain throughout the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, make a catheter of clay or iron according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	If you wish to cauterize the ant, as mentioned in the process of cauterization here, then proceed accordingly with caution using one of our tools for treatment (cauterizer).
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	From how these instruments are administered to give relief.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some times it is silver or copper salve (ointment) made of these materials: and some are crafted from small to large tools used for treating them; the one applied in children's care is small, while those intended for adult wounds are bigger ones.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	La form of scab is large and sparse:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the downpipe in which the bag is large according to this methodology; and that's where it is connected at intervals as specified hereinabove.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	The translated text line by line is as follows:
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And if it is in the bag where their urine cups (vesica of beast or lamb) are paused and its handle is a hand, then this refers to the container used for medical treatments with these specific vessels.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	When pierced by force due to twisting, and if the space where this has occurred contains its thickness (the injured part), then:
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If medicine forces it out (referring possibly to the patient' extruded body part), take as much of it back as possible; and if rest is needed after taking a dose for an entire day, then more vital energy may return tomorrow.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you tighten that within the abdominal pains and exhalation of breath in their belly button (likely referring to applying pressure or a bandage), then repeat the application of cautery until healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If in the belly there are drops or lice entangled, then gently place under them and on top of it (the remedy), for these are what children identify with their signs.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of disease treatment or healing of diseases.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You are already in the division of curing diseases that suit free will, and you declare this cure for those afflictions along with their remedies according to completenency.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	So it is said that pains are diverse depending on where they manifest and how the needle penetrates those areas.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When causes of movement are pains caused by wind-damp humors accumulating in their bowels with a stone placed inside for treatment, or due to constriction of spleen and liver (or obstruction from sharp points like arrows/spears), or percussion on the body using staff, sword, axe, scythe, resembling these causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	May the humors that are present in the body'thy locations so appear with a worm upon the head, or neck (the col), chest (pectus), abdomen (venter), waist (fitium), and resemble those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And when recommending a cure for some diseases, it provides pause and control over other illnesses as well.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	When you consume foods that simplify diseases of the head, and when remembering these simple conditions come to feast on the third capital (head), meaning in this context: When one consumes things beneficial for treating minor issues with the brain or mind, it will contribute positively during cognitive therapy sessions.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore say that when you feel pain in the head simple and not from a fracture, consider: if it' extrication of stone or appearance thereof has happened; then thrust your cudgels into the occipital as quickly as possible, do not delay too long. Extract to the second joint according to the quantity present unless no cause prohibits cutting (the operation), mainly when this head is small and suffering from apendicitis.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	If it is a flawbition of the contrary parts that are afflicted, and you must protect (the abdomen) from overfilling due to excess consumption of meat and drinks heavy in nature.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	May it be that with careful observation you will prevent any cause and reduce the amount of food consumed so as not to approach meat or drink.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	When pressure is applied over soil (likely referring here metaphorically to the ground or bed), if you numb an abscess with cautionous application of oil rubbed on it, they are steadied in a manner whereby they settle down effectively within that which contains them.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are sure about the application of poultice and if it has recently rained or the air is damp, wait until that which coats your hand (the powder recommended for small applications) settles down before applying the poultice on the ground.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	If the air has changed and it is necessary for healing within (inside), place a cloth dipped in oil inside while being cured.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	May the child be large or through ignorance of spaces and appearances, and if their lips are not properly adjusted for puppies, then fix those with stitches as recommended by them (doctors).
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	May it be that the child has been discovered between bone and pen (bone and skin), but not restrained by you with anything more than a small suspender; thus inquire about that very same one as medicine brings back flesh to its natural place within the cranium, commanding the humors of phlegm: cabbages and vegetables like broth or gruel, putting some into their mouths (and feeding them), so long as it is prepared for consumption.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	If there is decay in the spine and it does not stick to the bone, then you cut off all this putrefied material with water and apply careful attention (to clean).
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	May if in these plagues the artery or vein through which blood may flow becomes exposed and is not healed by medicine, then you must examine that particular vessel; and if it has been damaged but not severed, cut into it with a sponge or ligature, provided this does not cause additional discomfort to what we have mentioned.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these pains are simple and small, then the cause of them is a chill; apply powder to those areas until this very day when the cold dissipates them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The mania of the polish: this is a recipe where one ensis chopped into pieces, two parts of dragon'dictone each (which have not been extinguished), three in total; all mixed and crushed together herein lies its powdered form, which when consumed within these walls will be formed as le sanc.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Return the strength there to its pills and legs, and do not let them slide while they are lying down so that medicine is administered when healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	When any one performs only cautery alone, they are not in their presence with thy essence and sanctified thunder-stone.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And now this operation takes place on the large humors when it is deemed necessary that they be stopped over them and are already settled in their sources, wherein the air has not been disturbed.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	If the air has been altered, and especially in summer time, you do not understand where this powder is placed, then take care of those places with stronger medicines that we have mentioned before; or pause on these dusts from flour mixed with water and honey inside which syrup will heal them. Furthermore, pay attention to the other remedy while they are being cured.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If you break a bone in your body, and it is small, then extract the water from its movement.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	Yeah directs the treatment of skull fractures in this poisonous substance/medicine that is being used.
De las plaguas del col.	From the diseases of the colon.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If you have an acid in the chest, there is no difference in medicine; and between the child'se head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	May the nerve of the colon or artery be inscribed upon it; if it is a nerve, then it's not in that place for treatment with water which causes strong spasm and fever-like symptoms among them, so do as when taking care of such conditions. With wine and ointments applied to their hands (which they hold), these will help prevent the issues associated with those nervous structures or arteries.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	No joints stop for any cause of complete madness; the substance of the nerves is also feverish and continues in the brain, which they place into all their members themselves.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	If there is a need for the curing of diseases using unguents and waters pure or impure (medicinal solutions), then some washing with clear water, scented oil poured into it, heat applied during the washing process along with other pebbles moving according to this methodology, lubrication of rheumatic joints.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the child is large, apply stitching or clamp their lips together, and take care that those pills enter until healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	May it be that if there is depth or pain in the lower parts of the body cavity, then through such an opening pierce into the location where gout has penetrated.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If in the soil there is an inserted artery and blood flow has been obtained from it, then separate or dry that out, or perform cauterization if necessary to provoke a downward movement of fluids (blood).
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	May you have already fixed the vertebrae of the spine or all, and so protected the veins in the neck, do not touch that; rather adjust the lips of the cushion on the spinal column without touching it; tighten this to restore its natural shape according to structure, apply force as needed for several days until healing. Keep watch over him during these times when care and stimulation are necessary for his recovery.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the child already experiences pain in the bone, you will strike that area; and if there are fragments of hipbone present, remove all those which you can from them; but if it is not within your power to do so, allow water for the child to become moistened, thus causing separation, afterward removing both the fragmented parts and ensuring detachment.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	If the patient is recently ill, then grind some of this powder over them as recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	May it be that in the dirt there is a leak (fistula), and if so, heals with water from which memory will return to his head.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of pains in the chest or similar when it falls between the shoulders and is felt at a distance, either on the chest or shoulder (between them), these are called hernias by those who experience such pain.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is percussion of lance or cushion, and sometimes the depth, pay attention also when the belly breathes due to winds in the bladder; consider that the body (the patient) is dying.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	If there is not depth and the patient's condition has just worsened recently in their lungs, then you pause until the first hour of morning prayer time without straining it so that its sac does not remain deep within the lung and return to the heart while reducing malaute; perhaps also rest with linen applied on them during these observations.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	If the ointment is not at hand, then rest in the sweaty bedcloths provided for that water which comes from the humidities; and make sure that gout runs over these dirty linens so it can be drawn out (or absorbed).
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	May it have passed three days or more without worsening the malady'dictating spasm, tremor of bad blood, nor stricture (constriction) thereof; then you take other good things at your disposal and apply them wisely, so that the patient is saved. In this sentence:
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	May the healing of it be dismissed if cured in time, and already tightened throughout, then you will know that a fistula has formed; therefore take care of this through your own knowledge as physician.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	If the patient' extrusion is due to a fissure or incision and it’s simple on the skin of their thighs or back (the plague), then cure that with water used after suturing if large, or powdered substance if small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If there is pain in the bone and if those stones have been separated from it, then use a tool to extract them now.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	May it not be separated, then let those inside come out that they may purge themselves, for their extraction is assisted by separation.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	From other accidents in other body parts, health is restored by the water that we have mentioned before.
De las plaguas del ventre.	From stomach troubles or diseases of the belly area (translation based on understanding that medieval medical
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	 The discomfort within your abdomen is either great or slight; it has migrated (translation considering the context that perhaps refers to a condition like gastritis moving from one area of pain in the stomach region). It's essential for medical professionals, even
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	 Of the great it can cause discomfort in your belly (translation with "belly" referring to abdominal area), as if affecting nerves or vessels within, so that there is intense and subtle intervention needed for their removal/repair (interpretation of a medical procedure required). This suggests an urgent need for surgical care where surgeRelease delicate manipulation might be necessary to address the issue at hand. The use of phrases like "intromissio" (in
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	 The desired correction is difficult without another's help (translation suggests that the condition requires assistance beyond what one can manage alone). Surgical removal of them becomes hard, unless you restrain their penetration to your location immediately now, for if they are allowed free movement within it will be challenging how to extract or remove. This indicates an urgency and a need for immediate intervention possibly referring to the management of foreign bodies such as worms (as commonly understood in historical context) that may have entered through ingestion or other means; restraint is key, implying careful handling necessary during extraction procedures due to potential complications if not done correctly.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	 Therefore the best correction is to remove them (translation suggesting that removal of foreign objects or worms being discussed) since it's not difficult in your abdomen; likewise, extraction from other specified body parts may be challenging as well ("other specialized body parts" could refer here broadly). This underscores the significance and feasibility of addressing these issues surgically when they present within more accessible anatomical locations such as the belly. The
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	You know that the belly'dicts have four sides (or aspects), and if needed, you may perform stitches which are common to those of other diseases on these parts of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	Two other natural connections communicate with each other and possibly even between themselves in the abdominal suture.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	Here enters each one of you for examination and disclosure.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore it is said that when the child experiences pain from a protrusion (hernia), and reduction of such becomes difficult: either due to diminutive size upon examination, or because the hernia swells with cold air exposure – one in two approaches are needed.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when the fluid is rising upwards, at that moment cut and immerse there a moist wool cloth alone or soaked in water movingly, and cloves, pepper, and ointments into this space where inflammation should be resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And when diuretics have been used and it is better than water alone in the resolution of inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	So when the inflammation is resolved, then you moisten the intestine in the place where it has protruded and swelled with water, due to a little cause; this allows for addressing the patient'se internal condition that led to discomfort or pain.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If you manage to release the patient from this treatment, then divide the rupture into small parts using an instrument with which they have been previously numbed (incisions).
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The initial part of the text translates as follows in English line by line:
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	From the tool, its form is as follows:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One sharp turn of the wheel, and the other not acute, and the subtlety, it is neither due to the delicacy of bone—here both parts are blunted with a small tool.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the swelling increases and comes out of its place (the intestine or hernia), it is best that you restore its size to what nature intended for it in its own location if at all possible thereon; four times better than not doing so.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is wide open and located in the lower abdomen, where you press on their belly button, holding their hands firmly; if it' extruded from below (the ventral cavity), then hold up his head and place cushions underneath them.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation:
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	When it is necessary that you apply coolness on large accumulations and in places where fluids migrate,
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	In minor illnesses, the preparation you have made is for your use, and assign that servant to be between your two palms held tightly together, which tongue will hold all disruption within its grasp at this time, and adjusts lips over there from cause here, as needed.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	Even where the needle is placed in either of the patient'thy thighs for that their flesh may not be cut down and that worming shall have no access to them therein.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And so that there is not a delay in stitching for which the patient may be forbidden from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	Return the fingers or ends of needles so that they do not pierce through the patient' extraneous body part, resting over the sewn-open stitches expanded throughout all parts, where these finger/ends are held; and lay them down only when you know that the flesh has already healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These surgical tools consist of needles and threads in a manner suitable for small wounds; it is sufficient to use either an individual needle or thread, alternatively that amount used for their suture should suffice therein.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	May the second stitch be common: and it is that you gently apply sutures to all four limbs' extremities (from wrist to heel), using a needle of varying fineness and thickness, under careful guidance with your tongue in one sitting.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	When the needle is in these four extremities (hands and feet), reduce the needle of that midwife's cut piece where you are working with, to ensure that the wound cavity below has been cleansed into a division for cloth bandaging, so that the dressing will be secure as strong linen.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	When there is a pause between any of these stitches in terms of body mass (the size), do so accordingly with what has been described hereinabove for each respective area, to maintain the proper structure and function
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	In this situation regarding a surgical seam or stitch, it serves as protection for men (referring possibly to
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	In this case regarding the stitch, it acts as a safeguard wherein there was an offending foreign object (bug), larger than a palm, that had become lodged in someone's abdomen containing them internally within their chest cavity ('home'). It has been disturbed by surrounding bowels and disrupting the intestinal membrane. Consequently, you must reduce this displaced organ which was free-floating inside for approximately 24 hours or so (the number 'xxiiii' suggests an approximation).
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And after fourteen or around days have passed for consolidation and treatment of that disease, apply moist heat as needed to stimulate motion in their positions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	E the other doctors had not healed it; and by miracle fire, they did not cure that which was in a place where neither scabbard nor medicine existed, perhaps curing twice daily for two days using honey water within this flame to restore health.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	May you direct two kinds of surgical stitches according to what is described in Paracelsus' writings.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	When you begin with suture of the chin and insert the needle from one side to another, into the cheek.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	So when the needle enters into the navel and that same portion of flesh, where you have inserted the needle before; let it also penetrate in the other end of this portion to enter into the opposite extreme part of my body.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	When you have felt that infiltration, then make another intrusion either above or below the extreme part of this section here and there; let the exterior part where it is located also be penetrated by the needle on the other side of these sections.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	When your permeation enters the cavity of that in which it has entered, particularly at the end (extremity) of what is inside there where all have gone into, let everything be done through that very entry point.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Here begins at this patient'se side, and takes that out of the groin into the other thigh thereon, piercing with a needle from the cleft where it enters, driving back in that same place within its own entrance site located on this opposite limb; now taking another one down here, which is part by itself.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And hereby provide some relief and another kind of comfort, so that you may have provided all that is necessary according to him/her as per example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	May the second kind of suture proper to Gualia is what I speak and recommend through me; it'sup that when you sew this half-life (the term 'semilitude' might refer here to some aspect or phase of treatment) as a medicinant does, they attach all parts of their division/case to the part suitable for nature at its time. They apply another person's hand and the mirrored extremity on each other’s hands; this happens according to your recommendation (or guidance).
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you hold the needle in your hand, at the end of departure from division, and insert that into this part herein mentioned, and turn over both ends of the catheter; then rotate the needle so that it enters back to the divided section on two extremities of the catheter.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And turn those hips over them, and let the dislocated joints enter their proper parts through either of the two limbs that are in contrast with it (the opposite limb).
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This stitching is better than ordinary sewing and it's for which previous memory recalls.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is called "Guaiana's speech
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And if you need to sew the abdomen with two hooks using these very same stitches, insert your fingers into these holes so that when inserting the pointed needle used for this procedure, it penetrates through another suture likewise tightened around their chest.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	When a rupture occurs at the belly'seat of digestion (belly), it is understood that its closure (stitching) becomes more difficult than in other parts of the stomach/abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The art of medicine for children is judgment of other diseases.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	When the cause occurs as soon as you finish washing that which has just touched it (the wet clay), and restore the intestine and hernia to their cavity appropriately, placing your hand over that covering fleshly layer thereafter.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	If the air has altered the humors within you and they have become hardened and formed into fields, then make them consolidated pebbles or mirrors; take care of that which is sickness as well in order to cure it:
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	May you not have the medicines with you at this moment; pause here on that which has just come up (implying a remedy or treatment), allowing it to start taking effect, typically for about this day and night while you learn from me how things work out, until he is cured. Thus, you will no longer need other medical treatments when the troubles are simple matters of fluxes/humors being regulated by our intervention today.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the vermin will communicate in injury to the main members of the body, then when you submerge wool in cold-pressed oil or rose oil and pause it within the spaces between the joints where legs meet, doing so may prevent such communication by pests.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	If there is pain or putrefaction in your intestines, they will gradually worsen; and if the inflammation reaches the cavity of it, that part becomes blackish with stitches tightly applied to you, especially if the protrusion has entered into the cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	When you know that which is large from the intestine is a milder healing than what is found in the small intestines, understand this: what resides within the larger intestines provides better health recovery compared to what exists within the smaller ones.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: It is difficult for the intestine which has been called "gout," not to receive healing within this container; and it occurs due to the great number of veins in the body, as well as their size in those areas, and because of its subtlety compared to that part'se nature concerning nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	May it be that the one who proceeds from the soil is fabric (earth), and you obtain such recently made material; then reduce those bulges with your straightened hand, which has already been applied to shrink them downward.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If space has passed and black or red blood is expelled therein, then press that faithful limb over the place where it turns dark to make its flow of blood return into vessels.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And where it is placed there, that other fluid which belongs here goes down through your feet'dictum and hands; so you must apply pressure on this part with a cloth for absorption of fluids and removal of pus discharge from limbs.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remember when you have inflammation in the belly (budel).
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When you have a disruption in the intestine and it is considered possible to restore it internally at home, provided that this thing which was causing pain due to percussion of lance on patient' extralabial part (seventh region of stomach), ancient/rotten fistula, along with distress from handling and windiness.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	And now you apply the treatment that was not confirmed in its healing of him/her, perhaps ceasing subtly what is within that focuses on health and solidifies the location.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	E you have already secured the location firmly, and placed your hand over the groin area where an evil spirit is rising within them in their belly; they do not prevent such accidents from occurring at all through mismanagement of diet or exercise on their own body.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Return your pace or place another formation on the first one as per their total body mass.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Return that which is inside the swelling, and break those attached chains within it so that the swolthy may heal; do not cause harm to anyone's malady.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine has been pierced by something delicate from within the body using an arrow; you grasp the extremity of these internal fields (intestines), wrap them with fine thread, and insert this thread into the holes made in the intestine itself. This action reduces bleeding caused by disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This surgical thread is only a second means of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the child is large and wide, mainly if it's in one of the small intestines (budella), then do not engage with it directly but rather gently handle its delicate nature; such treatment cannot cure everything for him.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of care for hernias and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You understand that when all children and apostema become weakened and ulcers form without healing or detachment anywhere in the body at any time, universally a fistula is formed; this we call acute inflammation.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: A fistula according to truth is a tightly woven, white fabric where there'thy no pain and it has been sewn up like one would with thread for puncture; thus, they call that partache (sharp or cutting pains).
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	When it is in moisture, and quickly this moistness dissipates within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Some moisture is moved here and it can be light, heavy, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	Here is the translation line by line:
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And have shown all those causes and their symptoms are in the division of medicine for treatment.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	When you have thus made your knowledge of the treatment for an abscess caused by operation on the breast,
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	E know that fistulas occur in all the limbs, and from those are fistulas which enter into large veins and arteries, or nerves, or spinal canal (vertebrae), or bladder, or any of the ribs, or some of the vertebrae of the spine; they contribute to proximity between the main limb(s) and likenesses.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And so this one among these ulcers that are according to the present madness is from difficult healing and does not receive care; it requires labor and lack of knowledge for its treatment.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If there is any depth in the ulcer that does not reach these places mentioned herein, and you hope for its healing, and wish to become acquainted with it again, then take either mercury or iron, and if the ulcer after correction still remains, seek out this one (the deeper part).
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then investigate that subtle lead which lifts and bends its course due to the curvature of your body part.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	If there is a horrifying abscess present, it is not within your power to attempt on them.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Now cleanse the rectum with its own enemas, for the moisture that is used in these cleansings will be absorbed by other similar objects and from their bodies.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	When you have stood over all these causes and see them clearly stated beforehand, then proceed to the treatment according to your confidence: for it may be that you consider an apparent fistula or opening near joints, long-standing (chronic), in ligaments, nerves, arteries, veins, or one of those places where something has entered into and lodged itself.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When it is time as directed by its management from you, dry out the fistula according to what has been said about this matter (the condition), and apply what' extricated at that place where corrupt carbons have filtered through—carbon deposits formed within or outside of flesh tissue, including parts thereof like organs/body segments. Treat it while in the healing stage.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is deep and secondarily sealed shut, then do everything possible to insert that into the foremost of its cavity according to your ability; purify all corrupted parts throughout their entire bodies with enclosed medicinal acids, and apply these treatments within the interior space of the fistula, which you have come to understand as iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	When some humors enter for a few days into the cavity of the fistula caused by decay, medicine sharply dissolves what has entered therein.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Restore that which is inside with ointment as it generates healthful flesh within while being healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not healed by this means (the poultice or remedy applied), then you must perform cautery on the next part that has been affected.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	May if the cause of fistula is blood or it requires your certification, then inquire about that and dry it following what we have recommended; provided you do not prevent any possible venous or nerve issue, or main organ malfunction as mentioned hereinabove.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If you discover your bones and there is any decay or blackness within, then treat that which contains the rot completely; care for it with whatever liquid is contained inside so that everything may be healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	If it is not healthy and there remains no flesh to be taken away (suggesting the need for surgical intervention), then you understand that you have not yet reached the complete eradication of corruption; hence immediately above, with precision and refinement, perform the ratio and purification on this area at once, and restore what has remained.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	So if you heal, eat; but if not, then understand that the corruption is deep within the body, which has not yet been achieved, and accordingly take measures to address it therein.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the bone is rotten or it can be drawn out (implying an infection that may have led to decay of the bone), then draw it out with fine forceps, as I recommend for this condition.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If there is a stone in the bones, extract all of them entirely, and from none shall any cause your strength to diminish.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If any contrary cause of dampness arises, and in their insight there is neither fear nor mistake, then inspect those ligaments or bones herein present, and divide the bones if necessary.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you are not prepared with leeches for your bones of the hour (i.thyroid), then place them on warm foulwater where it moistens that same, and let it enter while those bones' flesh is within its environment; guard against solidification so as to maintain a state conducive to healing which you have arranged during your treatment procedure.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having feared being submerged in so much oil above or beneath the skin of their flesh and fatty tissues (and when those fibrous bands contract), causing bones to be separated from each other – they are all pulled together by these chains/bands.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If there is much bone in the knees or hips or similar parts of them like those here and if from it something has been taken away so that only its face remains for as long, then let that person sit down right away until such harmful removal (corruption) ceases to be noticed internally, and restore health.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If the rot that has reached it is a great part of this matter and if decay has already affected the bone marrow, then there becomes necessary to close that area where the rotting has arrived, which must be fully inserted into its place because, once done so, healing can occur.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And you should recommend that they go into their thighs so as to ease and assist in your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Once upon an age (or time), to a young man whose condition is unknown for over XXX years, pain enters his groin, and from the discharged mucus material entering into where it belongs in the body, this matter has undergider great suppuration (abscess formation) at its core. The source of trouble does not originate externally to him.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And when the time is extended due to errors made by doctors within it, and their materials have moved around causing harm, its treatment should be slowed down until the fistula focus has been healed; in that place burns occur where they use hot irons for drying out moisture from the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And after many doctors' treatments for two years and not in these fluids but within the body, he was called a patient.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And here is where he places the cushion and all that circulates from it, now the body of this person has turned completely red and yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then you insert the needle into one of those points and guide it so that the needle reaches the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Return and examine quickly those tools and probes, bringing them over all parts of the wound for their care.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I cut and incised on one of the joints inside where I had already discovered broken bone, dislocated it, was rotten/decaying, degenerated; also part of the cartilage within which there had been penetration into the cavity.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And when you have discovered and prepared water that I had,  
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	When you have seen that there was not in the bone but rather that decay which had begun and continued to persist, it has already been ground down.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Return your hand for the restoration of flesh by long-term medical consolidatives, which is not yet accomplished.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Return and uncover on the bones of the second limb following the first discovery, while simultaneously preventing further deterioration in the bones.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And when I gather the fluid that appears from this corruption, and apply fresh force for its healing and restoration, it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And now you discover another wound and carefully excise the bone piece by piece in detail, restoring what remains of it with medicine from thereon, until its width is no more than a palm's breadth wide, extracting that portion out as part of its marrow; thus healing fractures and consolidating immobilization.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	No iteration in the operation of Lu and his limb is necessary unless for the disposition of Lu'se humors and their lack of tolerance towards oneself and fear of death, as he tends to excessive waste elimination throughout all hours due to syncopic bowel evacuation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	Thus heals the whole body, and nothing remains in hardened flesh; it is good that his disposition within his own body returns to normal, and restores vitality; they converse with him through these arrangements without causing any harm during walking or for any reason at all.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If the bone protrudes in the place where it is tortured and you have grasped that with a ligament and strength from there: then hold on to that same ligament, stretching out what was placed first (the thicker second bandage), pause this thickened one; apply it over the flesh located underneys which protrudes your bone's location, extending its exterior part so you can cut where desired without letting any meat come forth from there.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	When a lance or table is used for decency and when it'sin not forbidden that the sword does not corrupt the flesh of our body.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	When the instrument is gradually introduced into the damaged area and does not appear in its full manifestation within the cavity of the bone, then use another similar tool as needed.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bones are decayed and not prominent, it is one continuous division within or in some parts of the body; then you pause for a while, and hold that first piece wherein lies the corruption continued through the other divisions – apply pressure with forceps from this initial site to maintain continuity of the repair on the preceding part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And when the wound is located in the place of decay, as we have said before.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If decay is present in the joint, cut out that corrupted joint, and continue cutting with your hand from where it connects to the other parts.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	If decay is in the continuous flow of pains through joints, it is not by chance but due to reason (or underlying cause).
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If the corruption is in the mouth or chest, it'se difficult; but if you seek out where the corruption appears to you and remove that part, cleaning each according to any possible manner within your reach, then restore them as much as you can without causing harm. Here means contrainddictions of veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	E discern the instruments and tools for placing these bones are determined by the situation of the bones, as well as their size, bulkiness, subtlety/prominent features (size), fragility or durability; so that you prepare suitable equipment for this specific operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	You understand that this operation concerns the specific tool you are holding; when you have great knowledge and long experience in these instruments' use, as well as witnesses of treatments for illnesses, then you already possess what is necessary for your tools at all times needed by the body to combat disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Forma de serra:	Form of saw (This line is already in Latin or closely related language; if
Forma de autra serra:	Shape/form of other cautery (The text appears to be discussing various types of instruments
Forma de autra serra:	Form/shape of the said or another scalpel. The phrase seems like it is part of a
Forma de autra serra gran:	Shape of this other (presumably larger) cautery instrument, possibly referring to its size and design for
Forma de ray:	Form/shape reference—likely indicating an aspect or characteristic related to shape
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	As such the head of this instrument (likely a cautery tool) resembles that of a star-shaped keycap, and their points are similar to those found on tweezers/pincettes. Here 'this' refers back to another scalpel mentioned earlier in the text or being compared with it; "ray" is understood as sharpened tips used for precise cuts like c
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	It's not just about the sharpness but that they should scuff out the corners of these joints when corrupted (damaged), or it may have a wide mouth/opening for treatment purposes. The term 'confricar', which means to rub or scrape in this context, refers to an action taken on parts of the body affected by what is likely arthritis ('
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape/form of other cautery instruments (perhaps referring back to a specific design characteristic relevant for treatment
Forma de razori menor:	Form/shape of the smaller ones. This implies there are different sizes or types being discussed
Forma de razori lat:	Shape/form of scalpel blades (possibly in Latin, where 'razor
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The other cautery (presumably scalpel blades) is sharp and made of iron/steel that can be easily removed from the patient'setup for clinical procedures: The member parts being handled by this tool are designed as knives, suggesting they have a pointed edge intended for cutting or incisions. Here 'decentment fayta’ might refer to sharpening and preparation of medical tools before use.—and an older style scalpel blade ('feyt arc de
Forma de lu:	The form of him/her (in this case referring to
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	 The shape of his or her scissors, which has a concave curvature.
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of delicate scraping tool:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of other curved limb appendage:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of small scraping tool like an attempt:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of cutters by which bones are placed:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of other smaller instruments:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another instrument; this resembles a beam and the end of it is compressed here in bony spaces within the joint region.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Shape of that line which corresponds to the place where bones are pierced:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	E is the patient's limb has a sharp, acute extremity.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is iron from India, and somewhat similar in appearance to all causes mentioned for rashes and cuts and sawdust.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	From joints of limbs and bone openings;
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are softened or due to internal/external causes, or when treating that corruption with these medicines does not alleviate discomfort, sometimes the corruption proceeds without any cause; thus you must insert this member into the hole so that humidity can escape from there, preventing it from causing death or greater damage resulting in more severe injury to the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the name of that person, it is because his limb was blackened from being beaten whereby a cautery has burnt inside him causing pain throughout the body part in question which results in hernia; therefore you become aware within this individual.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	If it is caused by the disruption of certain harmful causes, such as sea serpent bite or lead poisoning and similar things, then so be it.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the decay or disturbance is in the said limb'seat (extremity), then you shall incise the limb and not grant space for rot to enter into its cavity.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	If you manage to enter the cavity, then cut that which lies in its depth within the fireplace of the arm and do not give space for decay inside where smoke enters the fireplace of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	If that individual enters (comes in), then you will insert your arm into the groin at the junction.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	If another infection occurs and I send the cough backward, then at that point it is the death of phlegm; treating an additional cause with a certain amount of virtue is necessary for recovery.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	When there is a part of the foot that becomes damaged and decays, then you should insert it into one of its notches.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If you climb up on the leg, then cut it completely through.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If there is pain in the navel area, then you insert your hand into it at the joint of the navel.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If deterioration has already occurred in the sinew and it is not possible to cure internally, then remove the humors from life (i.dict death).
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	E the act of inserting or cutting the limb is that you tighten one ligament in the place where you want it inserted, and tighten another on the location; extend your minister's (doctor'dictor) hand to the parts as needed, extending their servant's hands too. Separate the flesh between two lashes of a sharp spatula until all the meat is exposed; then fix or cut it in place.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	When cloth is placed on all parts of the body such that it does not touch the affected area and allows for drainage of the adjusted injury and application of dressing,
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	May you cause the flow of phlegm when working, then cauterize the congested place immediately or pause some powders that restrict secretion until your treatment is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When they return the inflamed limb to its natural ligament and take care of it so that it heals,
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And advise them to apply whatsothy applied at home on their own body part; this treatment that they have provided and which has occurred in their body, the one caused by overheating due to fire-fueled burning of said body part.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	When decay occurs initially within its body that you hold in your hand, take care of everything concerning the entirety of the leg.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that home prepares for itself medicines to go towards the limb where it was suffering from pain and dryness of its own body, placing it inside the joint, healing occurs therein.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Once there occurred that same doctor's error in this matter of mine advice.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And now I am affected by it, and thus myself receive the overflow of water that rests upon my body'dictor; restore the purity of my body`s form; so the excess does not proceed further into another part within me.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And I am called hereby to insert my finger into it, and I do not wish to touch upon its repercussion from that excessive fluidity; for the movement of the humors is above suppression.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	Put that person back on their own ground and return so they reach me where this man has prepared everything in its entirety for healing, thus cured them.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	This translation attempts to maintain the essence of medieval medical language while translating into modern English:
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of treatment for the intestine and quality of enema administration with medicine.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When abscess is formed on the flesh of limbs and the space within it expands due to disease accumulation, then they break through or puncture it, causing infection (abscess), which drains out like water flowing when there was a vessel; using a thin cloth underneath as padding for cuds that are on their back/chest holding hands.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Even if spaces are extended within where infection spreads to any part of the body, it is then called a fistula and cannot be cured there.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment of him is that you must insert it fully into his body and mainly when sheathed like a cloth, ensuring not to stick due to its decay.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the bowels will stick and that this putrefaction has not occurred due to any previous action, when there is pressure on the belly, then take care of it with a cleansing enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	Return that piece outwardly; and let it be for so many days until the curve is purified, and modesty regained.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Here are the translations line by line:
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the ulcer does not tolerate Egyptian medicine or ashes of charcoal water, then you must administer that with water and honey mixed thrice (three times), and apply it to the wound where vinegar and honey are also mixed together; because of the property of honey which cleanses and washes, making the ulcer sticky. Mostly when saturation has been overcome by wetness and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	When you have taken some waters and find that the navel has become distended, then cleanse it with water which makes flesh secretions come out in him/her.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And when hot wax drips and dissolves that oil, or you cleanse it with some medicines and ointments which already possess their properties in the treatment of liniments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	If the discharge from the intestines is where not receiving (the catheter of the enema), then increase that small amount gradually, and pause in its wrapped sheath made of Egyptian or basic oil until it has been increased.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	When the suppository is large, then you should insert your lips into it and place as much of its quantity inside the rectum for which action the cleansing matter will be used during defecation.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	If the orifice through which the body flows is elevated to the parts below, then dry that up in the area where it exists within him so that his flesh can be generated therein when he contracts into a curve (the curvature of the intestine), whenever such contraction occurs.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If it is not possible to suction the fluid within the body as you wish, then puncture that which prepares your arm for holding the bandage so that none of its causes remain in the limb.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take cohesive remedies that are placed at the suitable place for water to flow out of them, which lie on their cloth (fabric).
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	E the cloth is as much quantity with which communication takes place in the entirety of the body; and it enters into foreskins at the root of the orifice of the body, where there's an ample amount that forms a large pus within said orifice—and extends over another piece of his clothing provided by him as per quantity of this discharge. And rest on top of such clothes some distance beyond the long interior end of the bodily opening for placement during healing, so it doesn't touch upon and disturb these garments unnecessarily until a week has passed since commencement of treatment.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	May that person who is on the bedridden (or lying in their place), which warms up at once and causes moisture where it rests upon the patient' extrication chest, to prevent said humidity from occurring therein.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	In order that you may know if what passes through the bowels is moist or dry, or indigestible:
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	When you assess that location of which he feels pain or is suffering from an abscess, do so with care and attention to detail.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	When your medicine is prolonged in this manner, and the substance that has been applied to the navel area adheres or forms an attachment there, then apply it daily until you remove it (and when removed), change the cloth for another and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May it be possible to expand the sinus and create space for subtle viruses within you; do not despair because healing takes time on those where flesh matures later in life, as well as on these where discomfort is present.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the navel has been moved for days and indigestion occurs (meaning belching or discomfort after eating), you understand that the navel does not stick; if delayed adherence of the navel is a prolonged cause, then prescribe dry medicines as treatment. If these remedies are moist with their substance and essence, they should be taken externally along ointment for coitus excess (intercourse) when supplementation becomes superfluous in adjustments of the sexual organs.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "The mercury that is used for treatment hereby (for curing) consists of fine wax and oil dissolved in it, which rubs on the body with an antiseptic property contained within its substance, and applies this onto you.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And when it seems in that position, without movement and with the use of liniment (ointment), wherein you have inserted something to induce a state of emersion (warmth/influx), apply melted honey or aloe oil and spirits together; distribute this mixture over the melting substance when it is introduced into that position, along with lint above drapes and linen for enclosure. Moreover, lay down lint on top of cloth and linen wherein has been inserted something to induce emersion (warmth/influx), applying melted honey or aloe oil mixed therewith; distribute this mixture evenly over the introduced substance while it is in that position.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Here are the translations for each line:
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the swelling persists and does not heal with this treatment, you understand that the corruption is in its origin within them (the patient), and examine bones or other hard parts of the body; already know how to cure fistulas, as instructed by those above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of treatment for suppuration of the palms and nails injured by cutting, and slicing or division.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici is setting the wound that was not attended to today from either of its feet or thighs and extends further into other parts; as it continues treatment, we highly value healing this ulceration directly with cauterization or finding corruption herein—we insert a brace within which rots the flesh tissue around said wound. Moreover, once decay pervades that entire area entirely while emitting an odor inside where these individuals stand, it manifests as pain in their foot and darkens (the color) of them overall.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have obtained that amount of water we mentioned earlier in the division and do not hinder your treatment, then throw away all excess moisture from the scalp with iron (which acts as an absorbent), and apply cauterization to this water, for these burns will promote healing.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is soft and the ulcer heals, then its additions are placed on the different parts of limbs, whereupon you start piercing it with an implement and extracting that part; whenever you pause to catch a thin ray under the point of the instrument touching flesh, pushing forward that bit until completely extracted from the body's substance. This is done while being mindful not to cause further damage so much as what has been removed for healing purposes by potent medicine concoctions; and care taken ensures it enters within where therein its wound will be cured with ointment, etc.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the decay is present in the bone beforehand, then it must be inserted and extracted from there, for none can heal a broken bone within itself.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the heart and liver are moving in that direction, then you must incise that part according to its memory image, and ensure it is healed properly.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	May if percussion or incision on the sole of the foot occurs with intense pain, then you should perform bloodletting from the groin area and dry out the affected sole using salt poultice placed above the transverse abdominal muscle (below), which can cause severe discomfort in the body part where pressure is applied; take care that this compression does not enter into the flesh already squeezed by water, as it could provoke pain due to superfluous swelling at birth on top of said location. Moreover, apply attention there because once released (i.e., when excessive fluid discharges), relief will occur in that spot; take care here with what flows naturally outward from the body part affected by water saturation and resulting inflammation.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	May be adjusted herein among the most robust men and women, fully in flesh or bone, or even within their nails; this is where we find them strongest.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	When it is cold in him/inside of him at a joint' extrication site or when the nature itself within these bones is from where they originate (nuts),
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	May not one born in cold walnuts of this thing suffer from gout at the joints; and that which is born in strong joints will become arthritic.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	From those who are excessively fatty in nature, the section is soft and it's necessary that you insert their flesh into a stone for relief at the spine.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	May those born at the joint' extrémity find healing difficult; therefore keep watch over their abdomen.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May happen to those born in this place, who have inserted themselves into the flesh of you and placed one of these instruments appropriately for treatment within your body, ensuring that whatever is inside remains healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	May consolidation which occurs between their pains or due to birth trauma of the home that they themselves have not experienced, or through child labor or combustion from fire sources—therefore causing them distress so much within those spaces and compelling you to restore what was lost back into its natural shape.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: You place a layer of thin lead between them in oil so that they are not bound together, and separate those layers; insert another such thin plate inside until it is fixed according as covered.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	When the pus seems to solidify in your hands (palms), then dry it out as soon as possible and conform it according to the shape of the body part.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From ignorance or deficiency, they become swolthy/varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	When varicose veins are present (vices so), and the swolthy humors flow within large filled vessels in the limbs of our body (envoltas grosses plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas les quals veno en motz dels membres del cors), mainly occurring at chest cushions, especially for travelers and laborers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Now administer some cleansing of the bowels from cholera black fever as needed for evacuation and bring blood flow to the patient'thy vein of Basilisk.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	May the cure involve their blood as follows in two ways: one way is that it becomes clear and attracts away the black bile, and the other method involves raising the vein and extracting its entirety.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of the text translates as follows:
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Return that one back (likely referring to an object or substance previously mentioned), and command it/him not to consume black humors producing illnesses.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Repeat the cauterization for varicose veins when they are swolthy and appear on the abdomen.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	May their elevation according to this method: You who raise the cushion of the thigh, if it is for walking on bare feet, place them in water and wrap the cushion back undernethy there; or if exercise without bathing present herein, let the limb be injured.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Return the bowel in its cavity; either at the back of it or on the thighs and lower part you must detach.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return urine from the bladder and scrape out the vein wherever it appears due to that feeling, which must be attended by you (the caregiver).
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	When you draw out fluid from under the neck of a vein, take that white thread thus obtained and bind it around said vein'dictum in Latin refers to medical procedures where physicians would drain excess fluids or pus causing infl
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Then take your tool and draw out the fluid that is inside which vein has been raised and located under the neck of it; suspend this amount for an hour using a lancet (which sounds like they are referring to some form of bloodletting therapy). This line implies a traditional medical practice where bleeding or leech therapy might be used, perhaps as a treatment method in medieval medicine
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then take another portion of that same piece and apply it for three days to the area below where the vein has appeared within; scrape under the neck (the site) of this particular vessel. This line suggests a treatment regimen involving repetitive application or skin scraping in an effort to address issues related to venous appearance, possibly as part of traditional bloodletting procedures or other forms of localized therapy used during that era for vascsicular
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then take that up and cut it into any suitable piece of leather for the sole; lift this portion above where you have taken out fluid in the second part (implying sequential steps or treatment phases), and raise/remove another, placing those over each other as needed. This line describes a process possibly involving foot care products such as bandages made from leather, which could be used for healing purposes following venous extraction during medieval medical treatments. It indicates the layering of different materials on or around an affected area to promote recovery and suggests that there were sequential steps in treatment procedures related not only to medicinal practices but also practical caregiving tasks
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	Then take all that which has been taken out (of the pieces used above), and insert it inside where everything is infected or wastage from any of those sections - now entirely full with pus, so you must then cut this into said leather piece; herein lies further caregiving detail. This line indicates a follow-up action in wound management during the medieval era—specifically, it refers to cleaning out (possibly by syringes or other tools of that time) an infected area with previously extracted pus and then prepar
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If you do not obey in extracting and lifting, then insert a double-pointed needle made of iron, fasten that one with thread, lift it outwardly (presumably through the prepared area), and rotate your hand throughout to ensure everything is properly inserted within its space.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Guard yourself that it is not dislocated; if it has been broken, you must make the effort to raise it over the groin for this harmful consequence.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When that entire atmosphere is expelled outwardly, the pause rests over the location of the wool submerged in wine and oil (not rotten), and heals whatever is within it.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the vital has contracted and caused twisted body parts (and this is not its second contraction as previously mentioned), then cut over that area where there'thy contortion, place your hand inside so it can be raised up in full;
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the patient which is suffering fatigue:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of an ointment:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	Not accustomed to being touched in these places nor is it an acute extremity that threatens the vein, for there's great flexibility like a lion (strong and supple), even if subtle; they have excessive bulk here where we touch them.
De extraccio venae cruris.	De extraction of the vein in the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is born in the hollows of those lands where Al-Ateg (presumably referring to Avicenna, a renowned Persian polymath) studied on Arabic soil and dry lands with little vegetation, where neither grass nor plant grows.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	When it is in other parts of the body as well, within those cushions (implying that similar joint pain or inflammation can also occur there).
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	The translation of the source sentence is as follows:
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And it is this vessel'dictory that suffers from inflammation in the bend, and its location becomes swollen; another vein begins here at the site of such a distension seems rooted like plant growth.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the extremity appears, cover it with one of those iron balls from which is attached a patient's weight; insert that same ball into II Dracon (presumably referring to an instrument used for measurement or assessment), and do not rub that metal on the suspended cushion.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	Whenever such urges arise from within and affect various parts of the body, enclose them in lead (plumb) mixed with some seasoning for that particular area.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If the pain is prolonged, cut a part and wrap it up around the swolthy; do not insert that portion if there's pus inside so you can contract and put it back into the flesh to cause abscess formation and bleeding in the wound and bad sore.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For that which is drawn out sweatingly and little by little must be taken outside from below the feet so as not to jerk or cause any discomgy in the limbs.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	From this vein, it has entered into elongated men who have reached me that they've sucked up to the length of their palms and fingers, having already taken from them twenty in all.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	If it is inserted during the hour of his medical treatment, then insertion into the patient's abdomen occurs and pierces that long tract in the body cavity until all contained fluid is evacuated from the matter; administer putrefaction to this location for several days as part of medicine. Carefully attend to these wounds.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	Therefore take care of that ache as we have discussed in division and with the water you mentioned earlier.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the worms generated under the skin, it is called cattle disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is not known in any land we know as bovine sickness due to long travels on beasts and it has little moisture within the body cavity that lies between the navel and the flesh, moving throughout the entire body, showing its limbs from one to another while breaking through the belly.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And it is by the generation of him that rotting some humors with worms and snakes, and maggots and roundworms in his belly occurs.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And when the evil is feared because it enters through the body and rises up to the head, whereupon the liver becomes strong in him/her and penetrates into the bowels, causing them rupture time after time: thus they must be moved regularly.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	So when you intend to heal and remove it (the condition), only if you have the walking apparatus and appearance of it in mind, then hold tightly with what is above and below it, and dry over it while extracting that very thing.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	If struck in the flesh and not bound tightly, then restrain with cautery at the location where it lives; its greater cause that makes this place abound is because of what you have taken together herewith.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	May if that being has reached the head portion of the bowels, it becomes very tight on top and above, with pressure applied to this area; remove it immediately, as its stomach uses medicines for evacuating harmful rotten humors bad in nature—and keep away from foods causing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From suffering above worsens it (likely referring that as time progresses or treatment is delayed for an illness/ailment).
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is known in our land as nourishing and it causes pain that occurs in the upper parts of the body; its condition can be transferred from one limb to another (member).
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And here you already see that which was recommended for you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You called upon a sick woman to a village, and discovered her arm had a small abscess in the vein of the arm; you left it for an hour, seeing whether that would clear out on its own, as if she were alive when walking from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And now it enters that pain into this place and tightens within the muscle, here we apply for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	When correction is made in the other limb while entering into it from here (in this context referring back to treatment or cautery mentioned earlier), indicating that healing actions are taken simultaneously for both arms if
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And advise me to rotate each part of my body as I move, for it is remarkable how the exchange and movement speed between parts can affect one's health according to these teachings (implying a focus on holistic or systemic treatment approaches where coordinated motion might be beneficial).
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	Indeed I had seen such in my own body according to this mannerism; however, there have been times when the wrenching pains shift from limb to another (pointing out an observation of pain migration between different parts or extremities) contrary to their usual experience as per these texts.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I have not seen such in the women'dictor here, suggesting that this particular phenomenon of pain transfer might be observed differently or less frequently among females according to these writings (implying
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	But I have not considered it to be due to fluids as in the case of a woman who was discovered with many veins and open chests where this shifting sensation occurs (which could refer, within these medieval medical theories possibly suggesting that visible anatomical abnormalities like numerous or prominent vessels might lead to unique symptoms such as fluid movement-related discomfort).
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary not to appear with such symptoms in those who indulge excessively and have hardened veins (possibly pointing towards the idea that overindulgence may lead or exacerbate conditions involving swollen, rigid vessels according to these ancient medical opinions). These lines indicate a belief system where lifestyle choices impact health directly as understood through bodily sympt
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	When you wish to heal the patient and they feel that pain, at this time it is not apparent on your part as though we have already discussed here; however, now stand firm over them with their leg elevation and drainage from within wherein there may be trapped wind constricted by a band (arterial pressure), then cauterize the location.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	Mayhaps if you do not time them at the toes' ends, immediately treat that area of discomfort on the body and address what expels winds from within, as well as those putrid pills taken internally or externally for relief and similar remedies.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From removal of stones (Note: The phrase "de extractione sagaudis" is not a
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Stones vary according to species, and in the parts of the body where they are extracted, for that diversity is why those with large points, small ones, concave or convex shapes exist—and solid; as well as those with three angles (likely referring to triangular facets) and tongues. Moreover, there are also stones shaped like chisels:
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	Here is the translation of each sentence line by line:
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	When the senchals of the servant are bent in him and pierce through bone, causing pain over the brain where it becomes intense due to strong pressure or heat, resulting in blindness (scotomia), dizziness (vertigo), moaning from throats, inflammation and spasms of understanding with vomiting resembling cholera's water-like quality within him.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if an appearance in these joints occurs, do not attempt treatment and removal of the stone unless necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	When the sensations of cold enter into the chest so that they are close to the left breastbone and cause severe pain therein, it is not due to fever; rather, their movement resembles that of a crawling bug or black swallowtail fly, causing numbness in extremities and palpitations. Therefore, you understand that death will soon befall them entirely.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	When the lungs have been suffocated by thick foam from pests in the chest and the vessels emanating from the colon are swolthy, the color of the humors changes, a great spirit exhales, and it demands an air cushion.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	If the scabbard in which it is located within the belly, and the pain occurs in the small backs, then there will be great sharp pain with heavy breathing or deep breathing, and not all of the body' extrinsic organs (muscles).
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If there is an excess in the stomach, then vomiting of some improperly digested food occurs.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If the stone is in the stomach and stuck therein, a hole of dirt or cloth has been torn open by it, whereupon there's no hope for its extraction from within.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the stone is in the bladder and there is no discharge of urine, and processes occur within it that can affect various parts below (the lower part), then pain occurs over the bladder; thus, you know it' extrinsically dangerous to life.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	May also the other members be with you as face, chest, and groin; shoulders, arms, spine of both sides, shoulder blade, hip bone, coxa (thigh), iliac crest (pelvic region's edge), coccyx (tailbone), hips/crotch area. They are safe according to the main guidelines when no vein or artery is harmed and it does not become venomous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And you recommend that I have seen of these doctrines, so as to indicate by means thereof the treatment prescribed hereinabove.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that in the home of his eyes, within the tear duct of him in the nasal cavity, it extracts from another part and after grinding with gold dust from the auricle'dict (earlobe), heals therein without harm to its dwelling.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	Extract from another source where the needle is taken into your hand in the groin of their genitals, and briefly touches it with one'se eyes quickly, and this lancet was also hidden among sharp lancets like Turkish swords without any hilt. And here we have a large-sized sharpened lance similar to those used by Turks.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	The Senate is here present, and there has not been an ill-fated event in his house.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	Extracted from another Arabic heal (who was caught in the gallows), and it is that which I hold onto now; and already immersed therein within his body at those locations where guides enter, so then I gently extract it from there, and thus cure the Crestian.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	Extraction from another man who had been lodged in his belly and considered that he died because of it; henceforthy I kept the hole open for XXX days without any change related to their disposition affecting him, focusing on the matter within and engineering a solution for it, so as not to suffer an incident at this place.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And if there is room in the house where I catch flies on his two legs and solidify them there with focus for up to nine days until they emerge from the thigh hole of that body.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: There is a woman who has been bitten in her abdomen, and the young are held firmly within it; she does not suffer any harm to some of her natural appendages.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And another man comes who has bitten into his face and solidified there the worm, not causing pain here but leading to appearances in these places.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	Extracted from the home of the king' extricates in their nostril area and had already descended seven stages into smallness, where it was completely concealed.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	You have been called for its treatment with the method of leg binding within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then you grasped the vermiform worm that has crawled out; and at once asked which part was subtle to feel it therein—may one perceive its point with the acute finger's touch, confirming that this pinch is from the extremity of the cunt.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Amplify and secure the place where abduction and digestion occur, as it is apparent in that spot for me; thus, attention will be directed there upon.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Now you pause above healing medicine acute and corrosive for several days until buboes burst forth; then apply it where needed, rubbing in that which has entered undernethy's skin, adhering there.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Place heat near where it is possible for fingers in me/you (the patient), and apply that heating element directly on you, with no interruption needed until I can use my fine touch skills or instruments like forceps suitable for extracting herbs, as soon as they become visible at the beginning of daylight. Then restore what was overheated therein.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	Here are the translations line by line:
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And you are recommended what quality of extraction for some herbs, such that pauses in their removal and explanation about them have not been understood so far by me, nor has this knowledge ever reached my understanding as narrated or defined herein.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	Here the skilled practitioner compares few to many, and as water is presented where there'thy absence of it; painful operation new in nature must be performed when foreign causes are present within oneself upon falling ill.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And so it is said that the stones are not taken out of the members where they are fixed, but by two methods: either through the place where they intrude or due to the action of the other divided parts.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And when it enters through that place or descends into muscular flesh and is thrust out again:
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If you do not heed the medicine at the time when it is taken, then wait until tomorrow to take it within which days purgation occurs for removing excess body matter and expulsion of its outflowing.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	If the condition remains on your body and you do not treat it, then leave it to be treated daily with a poultice and washing every day, already having been addressed.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If you do not obey your doctor's prescription for today, then you must puncture the circuit of the saddle in that bone from all parts cut it out therein to subtly enter into where the saddle is located and extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the splinter is embedded in the bone of the head and has progressed into one of the chambranles (cranial sutures) of the brain, appearing there as those accidents which you have shown me, do not attempt its removal from the bone; if it penetrates further, death will be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the stone is not fixed on the bone itself and does not enter into the joint cavity, but lies within the osseous structure only (bone), and rises upwards daily through its pores without causing pain due to these accidents for any reason, then your engineering in setting the stone and placing it thereon.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	May it be closed and not vomited upwards, then administer draugthy in the circulatory loop of digestion as we have recommended, with care for where it enters that becomes healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	May the belt also be agitated in the area of the body and emotionally affected, then you should investigate that which tries to touch it (the source of discomfort), and if you feel this thing, pull it away towards the more suitable place for its attachment on your person.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	If you cannot touch the patient due to contraction of labor and lengthening of veins, here is where neither nerves nor vessels are present; thus, it is permissible to intervene within these areas as they become enlarged for extraction purposes.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	If the blood is flowing from where her tendons are bound together and has left all of its parts to you, then heal the flesh in which it was contained throughout that portion held by your hands; if you cannot stop the bleeding there due to nerve damage or bone fracture within those joints, use another means.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When you perform the extraction of pus from any location on your body, then use both hands with strength and forceps to remove that accumulation; subtly employ delicate maneuvers so that the pus is not broken off and remains within reach for removal by yourself or extracted.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you cannot observe that of your hour (referring to the appropriate time for treatment), then lie down on beds during which days until the parts in his circulation are purified and repeat this action as long as necessary when healed.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	May it be that you create opposition in the flow of blood as we have spoken about treatment here.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	So that you contract the belly to make it correspond with its shape, which is where the focus of your treatment lies; this may bring relief.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If it is not within your power, then administer what you can through figures (i.dictions or visual representations).
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	May the slivers that have been extracted by forces from other parts of the body, or which has already progressed some division to those outside divisions and causes swelling beyond the protective bone above (the pelvis), at times exacerbates; thus you press on it. And this pressure is proportional to how much forceps grip them; pull that out as quickly as possible because they are dangerous when embedded in flesh.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	May it be that if held in the bone, you turn your knife according to contrary intent and insert into the bone itself, thereby increasing what has been inserted already by oneself or others.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	If not, let her lie for some days on warmth and repeat that until she is out of ashes (i.dictions related to cauterization or healing process with heat).
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If it is from the seed of a stone (referring perhaps to kidney stones), then push that one into its place there.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	May you have previously struck and wish to administer impact, then insert it therein if mute, firmly positioning it within the hollow of your body in the groin area so that you can push it along.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the screw is concave, then you will push that stone firmly into it, whereupon the screw becomes driven by that very force.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the patient is dehydrated, then you must concave all of their flesh where it truly exists if at all possible, and apply that which agrees with what seems suitable for them.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the swelling is in the chest, abdomen, bladder, or ribcage and it's pressed by your touch, then you may possibly soothe that area with pressure on it; be mindful of veins or nerves when applying this treatment. Remove whatever causes discomfort from there if possible, such as a parasite they might ingest, and treat the affected part until healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The form of forceps with which you are pulling down the sinews is:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	These are their limbs, like saw blades when they take hold of the seat to prevent them from falling.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	From those come special movements: large, small, and intermediate ones, according to the magnitude of the humors in excess or deficiency, as well as from the breadth of the body fluids, and their contraction.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of thrust from this limb that is in pain due to gout, for the purpose that its interior part may be drawn out into place, and pressure exerted on it by such a forceful push.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of expulsion from dull limb extension:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	When it is necessary for a catheter (ray) that has been inserted into him in the hollow of his seat, and he is pushed by this cause to it;
De fleubotomia de las venas.	De punctura delle vene (Vein puncture)
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	These are the veins of which it is customary to cauterize with flebectomy, those from where arises pulsing blood for treatment purposes (arteries), these herbs found in both temples; and these veins located at two tear ducts made by twin streams called aspexictus; the prepared vein near the forehead region of the face, and that which is present on the extremity of the nose. These are also known as algelic (veins), those in both lower lips below, those undernezeno upper lip, two from each nostril made by twin streams called aspicectus; these veins located at different parts: neck vertebra column guides, and that on the tongue's surface.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	May the veins that have been cauterized in the breasts be full; from those is a cephalic one, and you must bind it with wild thyme leaves (chastebush); another servant on their legs, and yet another on their chest, holding hands. The people call this "the vein of all limbs," wherefore they name the domestic lathe-bound vein as "citrullus" or small wine bowl; and with these leaves (wild thyme), you address them vulgarly called "belly veins." Veins in the arms, which are cauterized over the fireplace thereon – that is where it appears manifestly. The valve-like vessel between this auricular small intestine part and its little abdominal pouch: they call these two branches of thyme (thymus) together "the heart vein," which belongs to them, within their body's walls; here the cauterization occurs – is that very same one.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	In the foot and calf there are three veins; one of those is that which curves downwards along the dorsal vein, as in wild boar'dictor (wild species), and the second is saphenous, located at the back part of the leg like its counterpart from domesticated animals. The sciatic vein is also there, similar to what we find in the animal kingdom; and other resembling veins are present alongside them.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The strength of the veins that are attached to the ears is ancient and migratory, causing ulcers and sores on the head poorly cared for in old times.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: For that which it is recommended for you (to do) with its head above and gown wrapped tightly atop of your neck where blood vessels are visible within the folds; secure their collarbone inside a band so that arms will appear therein, then hold such person down firmly. If when holding them like this they move or fidget you (holding), lock them in place with another restraining belt placed at two points on top of their head to prevent motion and attempts for escape; hereby ensuring control over the patient's body movements.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Take the cutting lance in your hand, and it is that very one which you insert; place this into the vein within where blood flows out through the mouth of phlebotomy to the nose.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	When you raise your hand above the vein and artery, divide them at their parts below and incise into the vessel there.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	When the length of the intestine is equal to two fingers adjusted or enclosed by fluid, and it wants healing as much as possible, do so accordingly:
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Return strength at the joints and ease that which is healed within them.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And in the free consultation of those and for them there is a cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	May the veins and arteries that supply blood to the temples during old barber surgery are ancient and bad, as well as excessive bleeding from surfaces above in patients' heads.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And as for how you should perform that operation of opening those, according to your recommendation: tighten their thigh into a position where veins appear in response when pressure is applied inside it (to feel and show their pulses), then at this point, you must try.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Raise your chin over the vein at these parts below, introduce the inserted fleece cautery slowly into them, and elevate the vein in those places; insert that needle there with what you have already done in other body veins. And make it flow according to your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And it is already followed by their memory recalling them and that knowledge of the tongue'dictating its position in free movement.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	So the vein of tracheostomy is applied to the venous one in head diseases, and for migrase and vomiting and foul-smelling sores.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And as for the quality of his bloodletting, that is what you must do to him. So tighten the bandage where the vein appears; and take the instrument by which this procedure takes place:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the protruding point at which it rises above that vein, and strike upon it as if it is causing pain in that area; let how much you wish to perforate pass through—and apply pressure on the wound of the hernia until healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Even if there are some urgent bleedings from the body (flebomati), they differ because these types of hemorrhages come with acute symptoms, unlike other kinds that originate at a wound site and where amputation may be necessary when performing it on such bones.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	May the strength of the two veins in each eye cause blockage between the humors within them and lead to diseases of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the cautery is that it tightens the patient'sup chest with one bandage, and apply such cautery to them; you are standing on their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return their heart'se flow as needed back into that area; pause thereon and strengthen it for one day, then return those same things.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	May the bloodletting of the vein in the nose confer fever and violent coughs for facial illnesses and migrareas, especially when old age sets in.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	Here comes the translation of the source sentence:
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	When you last your hand on the small bladder and make it run according to your need; apply that one for an hour or so until that place is restored.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May the strength of cauterization for wounds guide contraction and treatment of leprosy and other diseases, as well as inflammation and poisonous ulcers that heal with pus formation.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	E the quality of that patient'supremacy wherein their humour is tightened by cold in the groin and waist; there stands the physician atop his head, with the melancholy above a limb.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Here begins the translation of each line:
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Return the ligaments and strengthen the veins to prevent the swolthy from focusing there anymore, and they shall be within the bed wherein their offspring is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And with the venous flebectomy performed on these veins alleviates small abscesses and pustules of the mouth and corruption of gums and bad ulcerations, as well as those present in the nose and nasal circuit.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	May you doubt it now, and do not know which of those is the primary one that I mentioned beforehand; if so, understand this as my identification of the most significant among them (the prominent cause), along with its clear manifestation in these symptoms.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	When it appears as if there are veins in the lips below (i.dict), then, indeed, such is observed herein described by us for some days or weeks ago during a single observation of one patient's condition
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It commonly occurs that veins are inscribed in the lips sometimes, as observed by us for some days or weeks ago during our examination of one patient's condition.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	The veins that are present in the tongue can be properly cured by pharyngotomy (surgery of the throat), removal from within the soft palate area due to tonsillitis or other mouth illnesses, and diseases related to the roof of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of performing such pharyngotomy follows the flow between your cheeks while you raise and examine the tongue; noticing one vein at a time on each side of the tongue where its hue shifts to black, indicating severe venous congestion or other pathologies. This suggests that careful observation is necessary in diagnosing issues related to blood vessels within these areas as indicated by changes such as darkening which could signify underlying health problems needing attention from a medical professional.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And thus proceed with the pharyngotomy where necessary without exceeding it in your efforts to remove those veins there; and be watchful for when these same areas begin showing signs of arteries as well—potentially pointing towards more complex circulatory issues that may require different medical intervention. This reminder underscpective, after a venous issue is addressed through pharyngotomy: the need to remain vig
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Here come the first source sentence to translate: In the veins that have been opened in the groin sockets where circulation is common among all men, and their puncturing is performed according to two methods; either inserting a berry or an olive for delicate downward adjustment; or using a lancet while applying pressure with fingers—this is how it'thy done.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this is where they come together and join, according to the width of these veins and their narrowness.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of foot mastication remedy:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	sometimes their limbs are heavy with blood thick and viscous like great vessels protruding noticeably large in size that contain substantial fluid; at these times it is decided to open the concave veins fully, bringing out this excessive accumulation of blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is how one performs an artery puncture with olive oil:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This trepanation tool is of lesser length and delicate touch, suitable for the treatment of small vessels that contain subtle blood within them.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May the vigor of the basilicovenous puncture, which is one of three veins: where swelling comes from above and below in the leg due to congestion or pressure on the spleen (thus affecting both thighs and belly), so that they come into being.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	When convened with the bloodsucker extractor, as soon as that extraction occurs and maintains control over it without excessive fear, every few times they do this, an artery is punctured therein, causing a flow of bile to occur so that when one does not cut into that vessel again using their knife, taking care with them.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the basilica does not appear for obvious manifestation, then you must lay it there and change to another (perhaps secure a strap or bandage), or if bleeding occurs at the end of the arm where that is evident; treat that immediately with cautery as we have discussed.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you wish to perform the surgery on your patient, then apply pressure downstream of where in your arm you touch inside until reaching between the palms (the wrist area), and secure a bandage over their hand; additionally tighten his/her arm and dry off with a concave cuff used for bloodletting. Also ensure that during this process, pay attention to percussion sounds throughout the spaces around the artery'dict:
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you tighten the bandage that you have tied at this spot, it inflates here and thus affects the artery; therefore, it obstructs it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	If you see blood flow during the operation with mercury of a child in it, and the wound requests delicate care; then place your fingers over that area for long spans; and press them down if the bleeding stops—then tighten your arms and hold until more comes.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	Guard your patient's humors and place them above their head to avoid excess dripping for the days needed until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	May it not be separated, and if you do need medicine for it, then insert a catheter into the artery when needed; whereby its extremity is contracted and becomes detached; take hold of that with forceps now moving away from there, and quickly seize another one holding tightly onto there atop location above vein stricture and ligament/muscle within other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	When the sanction is detached, be it so; otherwise, tend to that which came before its departure from the place of dust particles' flow in relation to the location where the sanction has separated.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The translation of this medieval medical text, line by line into English would be as follows:
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	May the venipuncture for draining is conveniently performed below the upper thigh joint and lower leg joint; thus it consists of a branch from the basilic vein and femoral artery, as we have mentioned beforehand.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If a vein is between two nerves, then make the vein in its lengthy position.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The puncture of the jugular vein is that it draws out the head'se blood and relieves the humors from illnesses.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	Here it is: In this particular place, if you wish to lance the abscess with a lancet made of either olive or mirrtego; here lies safe from all veins and does not touch the artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	Indeed sometimes you must perform the procedure of opening that does not pierce the patient's scalp alone just enough and secure it in place, ensuring no disturbance is felt by the patient unless an initial percussion occurs over this area where some cushioning has been applied.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Even if you strike hard on the living bodies without performing an incision in the first touch, there will be no apparent mark left of that application.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	Much depends on that surgery of hers and the accidents in which she has to consider correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	Le first of these is where you know that blepharotomy (eye surgery) is not administered but for the conservation of health and hope, with careful management to prevent diseases; it should be done in one of the veins located within the groin - specifically, the cephalic, femoral, and basilica veins. It's performed during breakfast or lunch on Monday morning, after taking food (postprandial), and at dinner time when signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	If it is a fever and lasts for three hours or less in the daytime, then surgery (flebectomy) may be performed as early as the first hour after passing through today'supdates:E sia fayta flebopoiesia e le tres dia o al primier pus que del jorn
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	If a surgery (flebectomy) is administered, it may be convenient and necessary either in the morning or afternoon, at any hour without restriction of time:E sia fayta flebopoiesia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	When the patient has not undergthyent for over twelve years and is a pregnant woman who hasn't had an operation until after seven months of gestation, women should not be operated on during these times they have already passed ten years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	When one wishes to perform an enema for any reason and has a clay clyster ready next to the bedcloth used during lavation (cleansing), provided that there are fissures held in place where blood does not flow into the bowels, which have been purified through bleeding of these veins, so they do not enter the body's main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	E they are not suffering from fistulae of the sac or hernia and have neither escaped illness nor evil spirits within which your remedy has been prepared, nor yellow fever brought by dragonflys; perhaps treatment for colic pain and vomiting is needed, as well as care for stomach issues, digestion problems from meals or vigils, and all causes that dissolve the vitality of body or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	Consider carefully in the subtlety of humors coming from foods and drinks if the patient is fat, through meats and wine, or with medicine it's possible to bring such fluids back into their body.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	When immersion is not forbidden or if it occurs due to any exercise for which the sanction allows such action, then do so that their essence may become subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	When you pause the bleeding in the patient' extrication area (presumably where an incision was made), it is time for third hour of treatment as we have discussed.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	Even though that day there have been many misfortunes with animals causing anxiety, anger, fear, and various bodily accidents occurring while one is troubled and experiencing excessive pain, discomfort, hernias, and protruded organs.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	When it comes to the use of which these men customarily resort for scents and fragrances, as well as balms and similars according to their availability.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the lancet on a thigh that has been pierced, or if it is one of those already intended for lancing, proceed with your action accordingly.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Here comes the translation line by line:
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	Either the early constriction, when it is not within the anus or excessively swolthy (overly full of fluid), should be forbidden due to its flow from the sancus; otherwise, allow for loosening and prohibit actions on the sanc's body.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return the narrowing or stricture so that those who have been subjected to cauterization of their masses inside where blood vessels are swolthy and declared in feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, because it is necessary for the bloodletting practitioner to be firm and active in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	When you apply pressure to the vein if it is dilated in an ordinary state, then be; otherwise, repeat applying a different swolthy place over that spot or hurry when there's no puncture.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is compressed or the bladder protrudes, leave it for a day or two without straining the ligament, and do not immerse it in water; otherwise, tightly bind an apotemma cauterizing instrument to treat compression.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	Return now (or proceed) with the cauterization if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	If the opening is small and subtle, and you fear that it will expand quickly, then perform cauterization in the second part of this section and place a few small openings there; once these are made into little spots on the body'dictate where expansion occurs (in other words, when growth happens at those points), they serve as markers.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	If you see that point already made on it, do not move over it further, for there is no excuse from your side at all; pause above any split in the opening of oil, as this will relieve the body'dictor (sickness).
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is better in this place than where others are (with cushions).
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If a great suppuration occurs at the site of incising, you will find draining and often more abundant discharges that occur mainly near where it is not circulating blood but only congestion fluid; here your finger should be placed with pressure on the location using a sponge soaked in water and salt, just slightly scraped over this area for an hour or until dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	When covering up body fluid from that vein of her patient, or another vein if necessary for complementary reasons:
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If there is redness or greenish hue in the affected area for a few days, do not touch it; but if you wish to pause over any cause of inflammation and dissolution due to algae or myrrh solution, or from honeydew sap (which may be similar to plant dews) produced by locusts or scale insects, then take action.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	E methodically apply pressure with tweezers and perform excisions of varicose veins from the base, which are small marks on the skin that have become prominent due to poor circulation or other conditions related to blood flow in this area (the term "basilica" here likely refers to
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	So pause your hand on that area (implying where the patient is experiens with pain or swelling), and if you find it softened by moisture/dampness, place your compression there; but if this prominence (eminence) is wicked and bad (malvade e mala), then be mindful of any cause mentioned earlier that might lead to the flowing blood from a major artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an emetic is placed in the water for stoppage, so that the place becomes hardened and this substance takes care of whatever else needed to cure it inside once healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	E when you extract from the sanctum as much as the patient' extrudes, then what comes out of the sanctum will follow according to their vitality and coloration.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the sanction is black (dark), then you shall insert and hold within when it seems small (subtle); similarly, if there is a gouty condition present, ensure that its sharpness does not escape while holding onto it.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	Here comes the sentence to translate: When that individual is weak and needs extraction of blood in a single session (an ampullogy), it should be increased, both for proper phlebotomy as well as lancing.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	When it is feverish in that person, their opposite symptoms occur, and they become agitated easily.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best is what is administered through a venectomy of the vein, not an incision.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This cutting of the vein is saved from bleeding and nerve injury; it was put in a good place according to tradition and duration.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If there is inflammation of the complex (possibly referring to an abscess or swolthy area), then drain it by incision with myrrh infusion in wine aperitifmedium, scented with pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similars; alternatively, use aromatic oil that also has a pleasant smell.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If you suffer from syncope (fainting), it is caused by an evil spirit of the mind, so that breathes in water under meat and emits subtle odors; use aromatic properties on any herb, apply to your chest with those elements.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	When dealing with causes previously mentioned in Section IV of constipation for expulsion,
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Whoever wants to heal their arm and dissolve their sanction following withdrawal of what is hereby extracted by cauterization (bloodletting), should apply it as evacuation, whereupon its fluidity will gradually expel the small amount present over continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	May those who intend to treat their arm, and strum the patient'supinite shoulder accordingly, and find that the body is strong; apply this remedy for seven hours or nine from the first incision of phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	May those who wish to pull the limb of their body contrary to where it has fallen (injury or dislocation), take note that this may happen on the second day or third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	May that part of the body in which pain has arisen and been intensified also be feverish; for it comes from within one'thyself when thou is sick, a great quantity thereof accumulated and amplified inside until stupor sets in – by then you will have maintained all conditions required for bloodletting; place your hand over the pulse of that part to prevent its falling deadly sleep (fainting) due to shock. This happens particularly when the practitioner is ignorant or negligent at such times as these fevers arise.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	When you intend to unfasten the arm and expel phlegm afterwards according to due course of time, when its claw has already been anointed with vena's essence and difficult part of sanguine humor that comes out under strong pressure, which is not good.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Have they the couch prepared as well? Or take away what is coagulated by sanction in the vein'sin the infusion of blood; or pause upon that already tender to arthritis, and compress it with a soft stone there; whereupon the sanguine fluid comes out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If a vein is distended, do not touch it so that the inflammation does not worsen.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If it is necessary for you to cause bowel movements, and that' extraneous reason not acceptable; then induce the flatus above that spot or in another vein of this body part.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	When the referred vein "arm funis" is punctured in the location of the dark or base (artery), provided it's not crushed or injured, then it consists of those things.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the bloodletting that is hereby introduced: The humidity enters its cavity where it becomes red and inflamed, causing veins to become apparent.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Return its strength over that which is bound tightly by the sinew of his joint or ligaments hereby located transversely and not longitudinally nor laterally:
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And it is both wide and your cautery that you are applying at the junction of this small one (the patient).
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	If the flow of blood is prohibited, repeat in the tail water and make the blood run in it until you meet your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the summer days, then you would be excused from bathing in the tail of water (likely referring to a public fountain or similar body of water), and rest is taken for the legs when young.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The surgical opening of this vein is made to save all other veins that have not been pulsing and nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	E venipunctura of the abdomen' extrication is given to intestinal diseases of the belly.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	Here comes the translation of this medieval medical text:
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And keep your hand on the patient's spleen because soon after they will be exposed to their naked bones (teeth).
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Return the hand in the tail of the vein and let the blood flow smoothly along there; if you do not return your hand to the base of the vein, then the blood will clot at that spot and circulation is forbidden.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	When the sanction is extracted according to necessity, pause over the vein and salt in order that it does not congeal solidly; similarly as if you are performing a whole limb treatment.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	May the strength of that surgery on her right leg be for those illnesses of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	When it seems in the foot incision as it did on the other,
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The strength of the veins resulting from bleeding during surgery is related to illnesses present in parts of the body where menstruation occurs or when it comes time for menses, and with old hernia cushions on legs and chest, as well as their semblance to diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	When the quality of the bleeding from Lu is that it enters his tailbone and flows over there where blood vessels appear within; and on the junction between the foot and the leg vein, draw out with your fingers what appears to you, branching into facial veins in the surface of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	So apply a poultice of abundant pus and the thick sole of it to the cushion above their foot, as this is better and more medicinal (substance).
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	If facial hives appear on the face, then you must guard against nerves that are close to where those hives have appeared on the face; pause your excoriation of these hives until you desire so.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	Given that this is an attempt at translating archaic or pseudo-Latinized text with elements of Old
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	If the sanction is forbidden, then wash your body with water at the tail (presumably referring to a part of the anatomy), and let the sin run free in that place where it has been expelled/cleared out.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the surgeon makes a mistake in the first procedure, repeat it on their own body where possible without fear of illness, but beware of your nerves as we have mentioned before.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and occurs specifically at the neck (the other shoulder), it reflects an imbalance or d
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	When there is pain along the path of the sciatic nerve (sciatica), we have discussed previously that it often radiates down to the ankle, specifically in the calf region on the lateral side of the leg. This indicates a potential issue with the structures through which this nerve travels and suggests where discomfort may be localized or originating from within
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The flesh of the procedure performed on it (likely referring to surgical intervention) is considered faulty at the hip joint when subjected to sanction or legal review, indicating that there may be concerns about the medical decisions made regarding a hip-related issue possibly leading to an adverse outcome
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the procedure performed on it (suggesting a surgery) has caused inflammation within and strained its back muscles deep in between, stretched out by elongated bandage undernethy beneath their ankle bone—an indication that despite efforts to heal or stabilize with such measures, symptoms may persist (appearing now rather than later). This might imply a complication from the surgery related to post-operative care and swelling.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	Therefore when it appears again (likely referring to the recurrence of symptoms or surgical site issues), you should apply that treatment each time and across all involved areas—best done internally via insertion ('inscides') or externally through sections/parts as needed, ensuring proper care is given. This directive emphasizes preventive measures for maintaining health at the affected location (likely referring to body parts in need of monitoring), pointing toward a thorough approach combining both internal and external management strategies—an ancient guidance on comprehensive post-treatment self-care aimed at avoidance or mitigation of further complications.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	Even if she is in pain all over her body; and if that which was aggravatio has been alleviated, but not fully resolved, bleeding may occur from any part of the body, appearing on both sides of the chest area near the armpit (axillary region) and around the ankle joints.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	Guard your nerves, and let them flow as much as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Return and apply pressure on the site of incision and tightness until healing occurs.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventilation and of those substances used by that person for treatment purposes.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	When joint pains are caused by grains (corns), or earwax, or glass shards.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When itching is one of their diseases (second types): one type involves cutting and removing stones from the sancus, and the other manifests as scratching oneself while doing so.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This abrasion that is being scraped off is according to either one of these two ways: it can be rubbed with ash or a piece of charcoal (charcoal).
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	When administering vapors for heating and extraction purposes are twelve locations on the body where they pause these warmings, one of which is in the area covered by this bandage (the head), the heat location being at the base of the skull; fumigations directed towards the chin using mandibles placed above their mouths quickly after each other; vapors from two lancets used here and there over cavities, especially on hollow areas like belly's abdomen.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Even when bleeding is not extracted from the veins thinly scattered in the flesh, and thus it does not cease through those vessels, even so as they are purged entirely out of all parts of the body; nor may there be any expectation that bledding will occur at or near these spots, akin to hemorrhage caused by surgical incision.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If it is necessary due to illness or continuous occurrence, immediately provoke that into the whole of this moment at mealtime and in the daytime herein (at home), as well as during sleep times throughout any time period.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet: it's due to excesses within men where they consume liquids for vomiting or diarrhea inside their chest cavity; from these arises bloating on their face and abdomen, as well as darkness and heaviness in their lungs—and others are producing gas at this location. Also those who increase the site of inflammation (belly pain), where they pray or cry angrily before sleeping: along with various other causes associated to them;
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And when it occurs at any cause of those things, especially in the third or fourth part of the month and passed during the day for three to four hours, they command that a breeze be felt as pain.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And when the vitality from the head is directed downward towards the head and settles into the lungs, it may that the entire body expel this wind energy.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This inflammation is in the location of cranial trephination.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not permissible that one uses it who has a complete excess or where there are stones present, as this gives great harm to the person.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	Through which opening I use that thing (possibly referring to an instrument or substance), and in the crowns where diseases are loose/fluidly present.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	May forgetfulness occur to that person who is constantly on you; and fear of forgetting arises when you command the bellows operator to pause briefly with a small amount at intervals between blows for them.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	May windy conditions are in the location for bleeding of the black vein and the basilica: therefore confer on asthma, constriction of breathing tubes, cough, and pleurisy.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	When covered by a small piece, if it is paused for some time, it generates weakness in the body and belly.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the warmth of alchemy provides relief for accidents in the head and neck area, travels away from it, calms down pain in the teeth'dictions, and occurs at the location of tooth extraction. (Tooth removal surgery site)
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	When you command the suction device not to press on your hand so that it does not injure an artery and cause blood flow, here begins:
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And when the wind exacerbates discomfort in the chin and gums, causing appearances of illnesses present within the mouth, they come to locations for lip incision (bleeding).
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	May the windiness that is felt on the abdomen confer to chastity, which it achieves by infusion of warmth.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	E the bellows of dismembered parts from the focuses provide good ventilation for the trepanation of three veins, which are basilica, femoral, and cerebral; that is where I attached handles to all these veins placed within so they can reach each other.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	When commanded, do not proceed with incision in the act of cutting, for the location is stripped bare of flesh and now exposed its nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	E is when it's about wind that blows over the abdomen and conferring upon the hernias of the belly and putrid sores just in time.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	When you command the windlass to generate a strong breeze made of earth, and it blows into well-lubricated locations where small disturbanse are directed subtly; then make sure that they are scraped off precisely as was done before.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	May gentle breezes pass through the small cushions for gradual manifestation, and they touch all parts of the body, easing old pains from rheumatism and menstrual cramps, bladder issues; causing menses, discomfort in both thighs (and possibly hernia), remaining at sites suitable for cauterization or surgical removal by experienced doctors.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	Even so they injure all of the body' extrices and cause fainting spells therein.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	E from the breezes that whirl, provision is made for their restoration with air in the sacks of these cushions.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	When the position of the belch is that it stops burping during mealtime and sucks in quickly refreshed air, do not prolong this position; pause those hiccups if necessary, and bring back those gas expulsions, so humors return to their location with ingestion.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease this process; continue until you see the place already reddened and swolthy, whereupon signs of sickness will appear on the patient's face.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And when you scrape and suck repeatedly on each part of the body, pay attention to its disposition (the state or condition).
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	When that person has tender meat of rare parts and you do not treat them or remove the cause, so their location will not become an ulcer.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	With command, direct the suction device to intensify the incision and apply a poultice easily for comfort.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	If the sanction is swolthy (thickened), then you shall scrape these parts repeatedly, and in the first scraping, direct the way of subtlety to the sanction and its moisture.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	May also occur in the second stage of acquiring knowledge about removing the thick sancus (likely referring to an abscess or similar growth).
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	If the sanction is of a solid nature (refers to an obstinate or indigestible substance in the body), then cut through the smooth part for it to continue its passage further down.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And at the end, when we extract small amounts of blood from each part or little one for us is sufficient scarring.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	If we wish to extract a sick humor (disease-causing humoral imbalance), then cut the affected area with medicine; and if it is known that the sickness is large, let us first perform an incision before cutting for treatment.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The term of cauterization in which only the depth of the navel is concerned.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the bowel is thick, hard, black, and their pores are streaming, so that the places of the sweats become untanned, opened, dissolved; if it's summer time, apply oil from aloe or castor, olive oil from ripe olives, chamomile oil, or sanctus oil to these likenesses.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the excess is thick and heavy, beware, then apply linseed oil, or balm of comfrey, or oil of aloe, or healing wine; their appearance shall provide guidance.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	May if the bellows is made of thick leather for the tinder holder, then it must not be greased with oil and should have its vents placed on those locations using water from goblets or jugs filled with hot spring water, alewaters (water heated by fire), boiling water, or warm wine.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	When it is derived from damp moisture, washes the patient'se winds with water drawn from myrtle and sumac, or similar substances to them; these are brought about for those individuals.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	From that which the superfluous are thick, wash their breaths with vin antique or water of wine from grape (wine), either majorana herb, or acorn juice, or clover decoction; and by their appearance.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When the venous congestion is guarded by bathing; have places where it has been administered through washing for an hour or two hours, and there are areas where one rests the veinfulness.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What should be done so that the wind-gathering bloodletting is performed before drawing off air (wind).
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	When considering the meal: if the wind-catcher or that which is used for cleansing and heating over you sick with cold chills and inflammation, consider causes of coolness, such as acetic vinegar milgranates, endive greens and lettuce, along with sage, juniper berries, horehound, thyme, bay leafs, fennel seeds, ginger root, cloves, dried coriander (cilantro), allspice.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	When they take their food with bread and roasted meats prepared in the oven, and vegetables cooked to taste good (the appearance), then pause for it.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	From that which the complexity is feverish and exudes sweat or vinegar aroma from breathing deeply (or vinaigrets made of seed essences, mustard, etc.), it is recommended for him to use little wine/alcohol consumption and eating habits. Pause on consuming meats in the house setting as well as pissers, pet birds, and columbids.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	When in the day of windshield and bloodletting, it is necessary for breath to be greater than food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	May the wind-like cuts that are made on you be stops in your belly and gout/podagra (joint pain), and epilepsy (seizures involving involuntary muscle contractions, also referred to as "umbilicus" or navel in medieval texts) at the joint sites of the knees, where these limbs do not suffer cuts.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	E no it hurts from these but rather a discharge of phlegm within the member, when there is fever in pus flowing upwards along the vein and gland of this same member; they use that for dispersing airy effluvia ascending through body cavities over breastbone and navel area. Rarely does it purify or relieve pain as ventosity departs from these areas.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And there is a pause over the hollows when you acidify and draw out the fluid from its place with strong suction of their humors (blood).
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	When it seems that breath is paused on the chest and breastbone within those confines.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These breezes are administered merely by sucking them in, and some of these treatments are given over the fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	When certain waters are fully administered for the illnesses of the belly,
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And it is for that the veins are filled and become full of fluid, only water alone or in which plants can be immersed suitable to draw out this excessive liquidity.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The given medieval medical text can be translated into English as follows:
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	This pain is of sinew or bone joints and thick edges like rough stones (granite) or lions' claws, which do not allow the body part to maintain its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	Whenever mercury or iron crosses from below upwards in their liver (belly), a lamp is kept at the focus thereof.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And this great wind that we have treated is now greater, and its pulse follows the second illnesses of those who use it;
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	When bubbles from the phlegmon and large limbs expand, they are different than those of young people and heavy bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And as for the quality of stopping this burning over the limb is to gradually light a small candle wick with tallow from its own flame, and stop that there on the margin of the blistering area so quickly it won't burn through the part affected by gout.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	Here it is the translation of each line:
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And apply heat according to its nature, and repeat that if there are digestive imbalances associated with it.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	May there be a bubbling vessel that is administered in the plague of diarrhea, with water only and without any crossings or disruptions, filled solely with water, resting upon one limb only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is how it goes: And this is its form: The more it swells, the better, so that it can receive a great amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from medieval medical literature discussing treatment approaches
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	When bloodletting is not performed on limbs but where position for applying venesection needles cannot be maintained due to their small size (referring perhaps to the fingers and tongue), it should instead be done with a sharp lancet, similar in use as when applied between the nose or teeth. It can also apply while extracting blood from an exposed part of the body lacking skin coverings such as after removing flesh by cutting away tissue using tools like knives (suggestive reference to scalpels).
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	When you have found those bloodsucking creatures that are in the humors of the body' extrication, which refers to removing parasites like leeches from a patient for medical treatment during medieval times—a practice known as cupping or bleeding therapy. Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	Return the bowels to their cavity, and make sure they do not leak anything into the abdomen of those who are famished by drinking water inside herein where no cause can enter thereupon within them—and evacuate the bladder through the phlegmatic opening or via vents; and cool down the swolthy member encapsulated, ensuring that it is properly supported on top.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	When they are filled up (referring possibly to body fluids or humors), in case of
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	If it is possible to suction the area affected by windward invasion, one may improve their condition gradually (this line suggests a medieval treatment where applying pressure or manipulating airflow around an inflamed joint could provide relief). However, please
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	But if not, apply heat and water to the affected area—it will be beneficial (indicating that applying warmth or using hot compresses with water could help alleviate pain). The use of these methods aligns with traditional practices wherein temperature manipulation was used as a form of treatment. Here we see an early understanding,
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the limbs of Sancus are continuously affected by leaking blood (implying a condition where there is an open wound or sore with persistent bleeding), and thus, fluids seep out; then take cloth soaked in cold water from within your vessel for wrapping around that which has abdicated inside—and keep it upon the area to prevent further loss of fluid. The direction here advises a conservative treatment involving direct application (of an absorbent material) and maintaining pressure over bleeding sites, typical procedures during medieval medicine when dealing with injuries or wounds leading to hemorrhage before modern surgical methods were available. Here we find references not only to the practical aspects
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If Sancus multiplies (which could indicate a persistent or widespsread condition), scatter sulfur dust over him three times; or gravel and similar materials to his causes stuck in place—until that which is Sanchus ceases from presence, whereby the beans have adhered within its location. This line outlines an old treatment strategy for conditions involving multiple occurrences of disease (potentially referring metaphorically here). The use of sulfur dust and gravel suggests a belief in these substances' medicinal properties to draw out or absorb something harmful from the body, similar to poultices used throughout history. Here we see an attempt at home remedy using available local materials (sulfur, possibly indicating mercury compounds of its time) and beans as a healing agent through absorption—a common practice when resources were limited or modern medicine was not readily accessible in the past era depicted by this medieval treatise. This method implies an understanding that certain substances can adhere to t
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	When necessary, repetition of bleeding (possibly with changes), when possible.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If blood discharges are prohibited from suspension, then it is necessary to press the location where fresh bleeding occurs or leave an iron pin in those places until I sense any new bleeding; and they should be stopped as soon as such bleeding appears.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	When you wish for a poultice on those areas, place a little of powdered ash or salt and then cook it immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Ayssi begins the process of restoration: from recovery.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is regularly used in medicine; it concerns the restoration of bone breaks and dislocations within the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh child, understand that these physicians and quacks proudly claim knowledge of this chapter here, but at times they ignore the free will of people or are unable to read those ancient letters themselves.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	For this reason the science of these learned men is confined to our land; they are not forgotten at any time since birth; and it has been applied only after a long study through the works of free thinkers, until I have extracted their knowledge from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	Return or adjust it for further experiments and study throughout one'thy life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol primier.	Capital First. (This appears to be Latin; "capit
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summaries and collections from the essence of bone fractures are necessary before we begin to recall details about the broken bones, whether it concerns one or several. (This translation aims to maintain the meaning as closely as possible while converting Latin phrasing into English.) In this context:
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Here we go, let's translate the source sentence line by line:
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And so say when you experience a bone fracture or dislocation and twisting (sprain), then cover that which should be compressed with cauterization of the affected area if no cause is prohibited; it may indicate inflammation, severe weakness, intense heat, or intense pain.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	When returning the malady (disease) back to its primary course, which it customarily follows here.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the bone breaks begins to be repaified, then it is necessary that the humors should pass down foods rich in nourishment and bulk as well as heavy (thickened) ones; similarly with bread made of wheat drenched in water, rice, legumes, cheese from cows' milk or younglings, goats, fresh meat, large pulses, peas, fruits—these are fed to them according to this regimen so that the clotting substance for bone mending can be produced naturally.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	Here is the line-by-line translation:
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	E are solidified and continued according to their nature for as long as necessary for the expulsion of those members, just like how bones in small animals grow continuously until they reach maturity.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Indeed nature adjusts and binds over the fractured bones of any part that seems like gout (a condition where one becomes thickened due to conglutination - aggregation, with entrapped entrails), within which they are bound tightly together when internal fluid from fortitude and firmness flows in as if a flame during feasting; herein no cause is prevented that could interfthy your work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	For this reason it is necessary that one refrains from the foods of malady (humors), which have weight and thickness in them as we have mentioned.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Motley diverse types of fracture according to different parts of the body.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	E verily you understand that the types of breaks are various according to the variety of body parts, and a break in the bone of the thigh is different from a break in the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the chest differs from a fracture of the bone of the shoulders; seemingly all other members are various among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	When it is necessary for memory of all types of bone breakage, expressed separately in its own section within the other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Motion various types of bone breakage in oneself is observed.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: In their tools for bone breakage, there are various types; some are bowed breaks occurring in stars (possibly referring to radiographic imaging or perhaps celestdictional interpretations); others depend on the length of the bone—fractures at the knee and elbow joints, fractures among children and dislocations at the head.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	The whole specialty is incurable pain that comes back after the patient'thy recovery at their respective locations.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Major injury of bone (The term "mota" can be interpreted as a significant or severe condition in this context
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	When bone is injured due to a lack of water (aquo), it becomes twisted and there's an outward deviation from its normal position along with the associated sensation; this occurs when you examine that limb in your hand.  
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And when it is not twisted in the location and does not cause grievous pain upon touching the bone that has been shaken off and the thighbone without causing great suffering, then there is no break here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	Have it possible that there is twisting or small crack, which you must cover with your hand and compression of all the above medicines; have pause over them in remembrance at those moments when they were needed for this place, and apply gently to relieve slight constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If you encounter an abscess that needs to be drained, then let it heal for as many days until the abscess stops bleeding; and apply heat therapy according to any movement or lifting ability you may have.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	When you understand that healing and rubbing of him are better than being in the stone where his pain has settled,
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	When strength returns for that which is coming back in him/her.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If the bone is satagated (swolthy or overly dense), it may be necessary to extend this broken part of the limb, whether it's leg or arm; or if your hand feels heavy, you must apply pressure here with yours as well. If both hands feel heavy, they belong together and should also receive attention accordingly.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	When you touch it at that time beneficially with your hand, and if herein you find any different cause, correct that immediately according to the amount of your virtue (skill or ability).
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Excessive stretching and compression, as feared by doctors who say that such movements often cause a cautious reaction during their treatment or result in contraction of the limb where they have applied pressure.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of a relaxed limb is that which I recommend; thus you understand how members are various in their smallness and largeness, as well as in shape.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	When those who are small in stature with arms and the firelike furnace resemble them come to us, let their covering be a delicate wool undercloth for all of these individuals.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	May those who are heavy with the thigh or couch, whose wrapping and hardness bind tightly together, connecting each large and strong member of their entire body structure at every joint, preventing them from moving freely within themselves in it all;
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Here begins the procedure, apply pressure to your patient'dict bowels as needed, pause at a suitable location by this fracture (which is in three or four layers of their limb), and tightly hold onto that suture with your hand.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Return the bone to its position in the area of the breakage, and apply a strong bandage that does not tighten at the site where you have bound up the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	When you encircle the location of the fracture with a little bandage and gradually soften the constriction piece by piece until taking away most of its share from that area.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Return the pause between the folds of skin or cloth wherein is applied the twisting nature of a fracture if there is one in sight; otherwise, there's no cause for it herein found.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Return your hand over this other bandage, and apply honey to these wrappings gently so that the wounds are healed today if there is no infection or suppuration present at the site—apply only what settles into an abscess; treat it for several days; hold tightly onto those dressings.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	These are the splints made of canna lata rake, formed carefully; they could be from wood or willow branches; and each splint according to this shape and form.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, if the splint placed over that fracture is thick and a small one has been added to the other splints, its length according to how it reaches upwards and downwards on the limb; and firmly press upon those splints as per your first bandage'dictions; place them under the foot accordingly where there was stricturing – when that fracture distance is increased from the site of injury, so will the tightness.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	When the sinews are thick and subtle, and they come from his flesh; if their fibers are large, then when you see them during the operation of loosening up these massive tendons with tools like leather straps used in surgery, it is a great error when this tightness comes out.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And if you do not secure them with subtle threads for these waters that you wish, and there is a day of mind between stone and stone.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	If the bloated area is led by the limbs' extremities and tightens in your places, quickly apply a heavy stone or woolen bandage to prevent injury therein.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some injuries are caused by a fall on the ground, and there is displacement of the spine; hence you will remember it in that place at the second particularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	E understand that when all the patient's limbs are broken on the first day; this causes one of their members to worsen if you do not rest them there for days seven or more, according to your judgment about the arrival time of putrefaction sequestration.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is how these devices are used by physicians who heal bones (fractures and dislocations), twisting injuries (sprains).
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Manipulation of setting a fracture when it is chilled after healing has occurred; this situation mostly affects the arms and hips, where neither warmth nor humidity prevails: here pollen powder (probably representing some form of medicinal dust or plaster) grinds within the millstone's movement in these joint areas.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And if that warmth does not come with it, then break open its hard book and do not stop the comfort of your patient from being neither heavy nor subtle; use this instead.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Autotherapy remedy for fracture and dislocation: recipe of asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach; mixed from millet seeds salvaged by dragons (x times), gum resin extracted by dragons (v times), myrrh also derived from dragon'sea drops (xx times); broken into tiny fragments and powders immersed in water or wine made of vulture bone, if the complexity of the malady is damaged; use this self-healing mixture to restore fractured bones for people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Other methods of applying pressure to prevent fracture and twisting: take milk thistle from white dead dragon, myrrh and frankincense from the same dead dragon, acacia from a different dead dragon; powdered cassicia (Armenian balsam). xx.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All have been crushed in the mortar and pounded into powder, and are ground with honey or almond milk and taken as medicine.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Manipulation of cautery at joints and bones, causing pain in those places with cracks and fractures: a tightly wound lancet is dipped into oil and wine mixture and placed over the location.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	May not have been for restoration and you've applied a caustic ointment properly which relieves the pain directly here:
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Other methods of cautery that restore cuts: pine needles from the tree and poppy seeds salvaged; mix them together for an application.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Manipulation of the plaster applied for bone fracture restoration and when you wish to resolve the issue of ossification: a mixture of alum, cloak, violin flowers, flour from wheat, all parts divided into three portions; they are crushed together with vinegar if the body part has not been injured.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is cut, then comfortably apply that same water from the colon or its moisture to use on it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Otherwise, when applying plaster for healing purposes to restore the limb after an ulcer that has become hardened: take raspberry and lentil (lens) of barley, and chaste seed (chastetree fruit), and balmroot, mint, honeywort, marjoram flowers, chamomile blossoms; all chopped up finely or crushed into water for cider press juice made from apples or other fruits according to the quality of the limb and resting period.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May Ypocras does not prescribe a free that is resting on the limbs needed for its recovery, but rather pains treated with wax and oil, nor any other cause; he recommends moving between coarseness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May Gualia have seen that there are pauses on the broken part of them for their restoration and causes wherein exsiccation is recommended using mustard, seeds, and substances similar to those mentioned by these sources concerning such reasons as they advise.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Mending of the plaster that comforts injury and pain: recipe for honeydew, from cheeks or teeth discoloration/pain in animals (or chicken), and thyme; crushed and powdered, they are cobblest extricateaux and poultices.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	May the quantity according to which you tear and dislocate it be considered; if there is not pain or bleeding nor bone fracture at its place, do not despair for days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	If you feel severe pain or pressure in the location, then bend over that area at once and apply a plaster from it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return that subtle obstruction under gentle and slight pressure using what was previously applied at your initial contraction, delicately placing it where it needs healing within you.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	If times come when the abscess and swelling and pain and inflammation are already present throughout the body and blockages of pus occur along with indigestion, then repeat this treatment as you have done for the patient lying down.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	If there is no injury to any of those causes we have mentioned, then wait three to four days or seven at most; and some treatments may be applied for up to twenty days after you observe the healing of the injured part, as previously stated, until the fracture has properly united, and the flesh coagulation rests on it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	When the adjustment is made in as much of your initial restriction as possible and placed within the belly fullness due to humors according to when it's remembered by you (perhaps after a meal),
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	May if you open the fracture site and it dries out and becomes weakened until not covered at all, then know that nourishment is forbidden to prevent this; therefore drink the water given by yourself for every day of which has been provided for this purpose; lubricate the contracture slightly with a small amount, through which nutrition enters into the limb, and heals wounds.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	May those who restore the broken limb delayed after meal time and according to their curvature make an error in their work as they fear, if it is rightly done; but if properly executed, this water will expand the Ancients when free without constraint or labor.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And you have not seen any of this water from them (the patients), so it is reasonable that they did not fill.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Capital Second: When you break the skull (fracture).
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The spices of breaks are motes (small particles), and their forms are various, with distinct causes: from the percussion of spaces none is felt for cracks in bones unless it enters into the cranial cavity where they cause pain similar to feverish headaches; when a space indents any part of the body'thy flesh as well (the indenting on skin or mucous membrane), indicating that this spice type, known as dislocation. Furthermore, if an incision is made in such spaces and penetrates into the body tissue without passing through to another layer beneath it; this kind of fracture injury is called absolute displacement (displacement).
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This break or invasion has already reached the periosteum of the bone which it touches nowhere else remains intact. Or is within the facial part of the bone, and flesh from these broken bones either great or small forms herein.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	When a bone is broken and it happens in the subtlety of the hair-thin part (potentially referring to a small or intricate area near where thin structures like nerves are located), this particular type of microscopic fracture does not have a specific name.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	Mostly it is pain caused by accumulated waters in the bones, when they are accompanied with feverish conditions of phlegm.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And in all these severe breaks or fractures, they are treated as separate splints.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	When all this fluid returns to its place in the body.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And with all these tools for detection concerning those and their attempts to remove decayed flesh that is upon them,
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	A special cautery is known for opening the bone and stopping it on top of it, where the fracture appears blackened.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	When treating a fracture consider the excesses of humours and if through those accidents there appears to be signs that mean distress (as with chills from colic, extension, loss of understanding, withdrawal symptoms, syncopes, acute fever), along with examining their pus/pleading, and likenesses to these injuries in major conditions, they do not heal.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	If an accident of misaligned body parts occurs, then you begin treatment for them.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	When the cause occurs if it has come upon you in your daily routine with this plague and water is present during the days of winter, then observe completely throughout all situations as they arise today at noon (the twelfth hour).
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	If it is during the summer days, when you press your bones against each other throughout the day and they become rotten due to sweat (the humoral imbalance), then various accidents may occur as a result of this corruption.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	If the fracture has reached the brain'supremacy', and consists of tiny pieces and pressure, then cover that fragmented piece with wax as you are advised to do.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	When you raise the head of the belly that is attacked by pains, and discover it above the bones of your body according to what nature typically does in an animal, so as to make its position over the abdomen (the affected area).
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	If you need to diagnose the bone and apply sanction or putrefaction cauterization accordingly, then hold back your touch until enough water covers it (the affected area), at which time place soft fabrics imbued with vinegar and oil in that spot so as for bedridden patients to rest their limbs. Thus you prevent the flow of pus, secure against putrefaction fluid; commence from around bone and incision points respectively.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	When it is second in a pair of operational methods.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The one mania is that you insert your own slippers there such as this, and this is how it should be done: And herein also administer another pair of slippers only slightly more than the first. This is how it must be:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And in this way they may apply bandages that are second-rate (or inferior) quality for treatment purposes.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	Using ease in palpation over the joints, so that you do not hit the head and guide it along this way.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the joint is hard and painful, then when you administer injections into its circulation immediately before treatment with pillows (which are not deep), do so accordingly.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	E for it is not their name but these that cease the bone'supreme of the body to flow downwards toward the urethra as far as where this round extremity or margin over which they are placed, stops them from being submerged and passing through the osseous wall.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is convenient that you grasp these heavy trays in the flesh of any part where each has been decided upon for its sharpness; as much so until all are found within your head'supreme extremity, according to their degree and length relative to the amount of sharpness thereof.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	Here is the translation of this medieval medical treatise line by line:
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	When you keep total caution so that the surgeon does not touch any cause of chafing,
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	So when the bone perforates and if it continues to be pierced at that place on purpose as in liquid within the stone inside the joint which appears like screws or nails, extract it herewith; however, this must also remove any putrefied (rotten) flesh and filth therein, yet more subtle than other bone fragments.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	If any part of the bones is small and tender, take that which will make it easier for you to handle them from your joints; apply water thereafter as care by means of linen or wool cloths with which we have previously had in use.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "The lunate joint is like a lion and has no cause for inspection, while its sharp division occurs in two parts before coming together; that the lunate joint should be adjusted at the site where it meets the acute part embedded within the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	Return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over it so that the intestine does not protrude into this area while turning on oneself (possibly in an attempt at self-treatthy), you, as a skilled attendant who knows nothing about their homes and men; indeed if he is drowsy.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If there is any additional cause attached to the patient'thy pancreas in its location of bone-joints, insert that part at the end where it was removed and dissolve what remains within it; for once out, harm befalls them both body and soul.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the bone fracture does not penetrate into the periosteum, and what is broken or remains of the bone is its face, herein lies roughness and small specks; at this point you must remove that roughness and eradthy those specks with fine tools for which you have prepared in various quantities so as to be able to administer them throughout all suitable places on their body where they are placed directly beneath according to the extent of your operation, thus addressing both the broken bone and the patient's figure.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	May there be any small cracks or breaks in the blood vessels among them, which you must administer treatment according to what has been lost for restoration.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	It is because not all have studied this art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	When we have shown in large breaks.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	If the pancreas is inflamed when you remove the bone, then take for your hand second cloth according to the amount of pus; immerse that in olive oil and place it over where the pus lies; also prepare another double or triple layered cloth and immerse him therein with wine and olive oil, maintaining such immersion until you can administer something on top for discharge above what is inside (so as not to worsen his condition); apply this bandage tightly around the sinew only according to how much pus has accumulated; do so without overstressing it.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	When these powders are prepared and they are dry, apply them everywhere as part of this whole medicine' extrinsically, with the aim that you will refrain from ingesting it (i.e., not swallow) and avoid biting or chewing on it.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Here is the line by line translation:
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	When the wound is in the chest and you have opened it to treat its bone (osteum), which becomes more significant when nearing treatment completion, then consider whether there are accidents that happened to him, understanding that his entire body has been affected by them.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If you do not alleviate the pain but through medicine that is applied above your head, then it'dictates this treatment wherein you grasp honey and oil in parts (likely using a spoon or similar implement), spread them on cloths, place one over the cervical area to ease discomfort there; similarly apply care with curative herbs as needed so that healing may occur.
Capitol .iii.	The given Latin text seems like it could be from medieval medical literature where
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	When there is a fracture of the nose, or break in the nose – here lies what can commonly refer to an injury
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	It is said that the nose isn't broken but divided into pieces placed side by side – of such fractures there are some in old age, wherein two bones make up this breakage; it consists not merely of a breaking and crushing at these spots (the joints), characterized instead by twisting distortion.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the bones is broken and you insert a small object into their nose as directed by this sign here above it (the image or symbol indicating treatment), then withdraw your hand while allowing the nostril to return back to its normal shape naturally.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And if it is for your ease that you need this fluid (presumably medication or a substance to alleviate the condition), be careful not to let any of it affect the patient'thy lower abdomen during your operation on them.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the upper chest portion and does not move towards it, then cover what has been broken with a limb of bone from wherein lies its greatest size.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the bone is broken into parts, then make it appear as if for a while.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And if the tail remains to restore itself on the first day of rupture, try it; otherwise, assign rest days seven or eight for recovery from apatite inflammation (cautery).
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause is not necessary for you; if you wish, do so here, and if you want, use clogs.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	If you apply a caustic application externally and cover the nose and mouth with wax or plaster soaked in vinegar and oil, then do so gently.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	May you not cut off the abscess if it swells with bran and honey paste applied from sage leaves (and pollen), placed over its head on top of an old lion' extrusion without any cause; thus, do not allow for nasal breathing or inhalation.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	May it be if the bones of the nose are broken slightly or displaced, and you divide them over those areas; then fix that cut with instruments I have designated for these purposes; care for this wound using what embodies life within us (blood), which nourishes and strengthens, and apply dressings as suitable.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If you injure a child' extramandible bone (extramuscular), then take care of that injury with such treatment, and insert iron rods inside so it may heal completely.
Capitol .iiii.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Regarding the reconstruction of the jawbone when fractured, here is a translation:
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone is loose and its fracture has not been healed completely alone, and it'thy break isn’t into two pieces but curved at joints, then your knowledge must be clear.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the jawbone is separated into two pieces, then make sure to extend one piece according to direction inside where it'm possible for its reconciliation.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If you experience pain from the teeth causing disruption, then apply pressure on those areas where you hope it will relieve into mercury or silver ore or copper' extrusion; and press above the broken jawbone cushion, double cloth drape also with a single tongue-length strip along the length of the fractured jawbone. Apply this device as long as your dental guard is worn and adjusted according to preference without destroying it.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the humors that they rest and find peace, stop the patient'thy food from being digested by their stomach lions (referring to strong hunger or indigestion).
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If you find that your figure has been distorted in any manner, then tomorrow at noon coil and loosen the affected area; rectify what is already altered from it by applying powder made of mold or eggshell/albumen (or flour), which will cool down the body temperature.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when that bandage is placed and positioned on it, the bone structure remains unaltered, so let this person who has not been harmed inside be healed quickly with a broken limb; such fractures are set in three days' time.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If another complaint of putrid decay arises, then apply what we have mentioned for these preliminary measures within the body'thy confines so that it may heal and treat this ulceration as well.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is in the bone'thy(-fragile), you consider whether it has been separated or displaced, and then adjust those fragments to where they belong within the body during its recovery process.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the poultice of the patient is dry, then apply more as needed on the wound according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	When you have removed those saturations and there is no more remnant remaining, if the residue is wide open (unhealthy), then apply poultice from mud or dirt to that area; otherwise, rest upon one of those appliances assigned for this purpose and wait until healed.
Capitol .v.	The provided text appears as if it is attempting translations from an arch
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	When the wing (furcula in Latin, which could refer to a bird's or bone structure) breaks when bent, here are possible interpretations and English
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	 Habitually caused by overuse is the breakage of a player's wing (furcula), and this injury falls into one of three categories: simple fracture, partial complex fracture, or complete dislocation/separation whereby all pieces are out of alignment. Here 'motas veguadas,' which suggests repetitive actions leading to fatigue, likely refers to the overuse inherent in strenuous physical activity such
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When broken it's separated into two pieces that do not remain together as before (indicating possibly non-union or malunion of the bone); recovery in such cases is often lacking, making restoration challenging; alternatively when fractured and displaced like a youngling with multiple breaks which are difficult to restore – care must be taken. This line suggests that healing may not occur naturally ('leugier'), necessitating medical attention wherein the individual might suffer if left untreated, making recovery demanding; or in some cases when fractured and displaced like an infant with several breaks (multiple injuries), treatment is especially difficult. Here 'quar' could be a term used to describe severely misaligned fragments that are challenging for medical professionals ('metges') to realign properly, potentially implying the
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	When the injury is as severe (suggested by 'la fractura es ses plagua,' indicating a severely broken bone), it's time for two hands to be involved: one hand acts as an assistant and holds onto what remains of the shattered wing, while the other extends support along that part. Here there are implications that multiple individuals (possibly surgical assistants or more than one practitioner) may need to manage a complex fracture case – with at least two hands actively engaged in different roles for stabilization and potential splinting of broken bone fragments, which is indicative of the meticulous care required during such medical
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And if it is necessary to set the broken bone within where it was injured so that its form follows according to how much there has been a break and not in prominency or hollowness of location, then do as directed hereby:
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If indigestion is extended, then you should pause intermittently with the belly tightened by a cloth or wool as needed according to your requirement; raise and contract the chest, holding it in place until relief comes from constriction as directed.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you cannot lift the extremity of the shoulder blade to the parts behind, through which it has come down, then the humpiness will settle on its neck and rests upon one'seven muscle forming a groin area in greatness.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E the minister presses on the muscle of it at the joint parts while the bone of the shoulder blade is elevated above its position in their shoulders, and here they correct the fracture using those tools there.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel heavy bones in the neck and chest and they are swolthy (swollen), then break them upon that area and remove those heavies easily.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If it is retained in the bone, then you will engineer one of these instruments that have been prepared for water (the ciscercle), and place them where they serve at the sternum joint; this instrument consists either of wood or iron.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It seems like the patient'dict shape of a hog (or similar animal with prominent bones), and its position is as required by you, according to the size of the bone or lack thereof.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	May the length of him be as your possibility for operation; that he has two limbs with times to take them off and one elastic and the other straightened out.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	If the disruption of the flesh that you have inserted when extracting the splint is wide open and bleeding profusely (apostematically), then adjust the lips of this wound with suture material.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the interruption is slight or you fear abscess formation with caution needed, then apply poultices and powders according to the quantity of the wound' extrusion.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If you inflame an abscess with caustic (cause a draining of the abscess), apply heat and wine over it, and rest on that spot.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	May the bone when it is broken and torn be immobilized with wheaten flour plaster mixed in egg white albumen (protein from eggs), applied over a splint made of stiff tablet, held tight by your hands which have Sarrazis rings on them for strength. Fix these items securely to the location of the fracture; cover both immobilized objects with cloth and place underneath that same piece of fabric another slender columnar pillar from a tautula (wooden splint), whose handle measures three digits in length, resembles an arm long enough for holding. Secure this apparatus tightly by hand as well; hold it against the patient's chest and continue to tap on both objects with your fingers until there is no longer any movement of either object relative to each other at all times – nothing should be hidden from you nowhere near or far away within sight, when necessary (whenever required).
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	Here is the line by line translation:
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And if it does not contract or inflame in the place within twelve days, do not remove the ligature.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	When you have seen the patient'thy face downwards towards water and adjusted it tightly in place to restore and solidify the broken collarbone,
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	Strong and rested according to the month in XXVIII days, and some discomforts occur among healthy individuals during that time of it.
Capitol .vi.	Given that there is no actual text provided for "Capitol
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	The phrase appears to be in a language with roots similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French (likely Medieval or Classical Arab
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	When the pie is broken in its location on the board, it's not shattered here but along the edges.  
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when the place of him — and it is broken in that part where he lies down, as soon as you are ready with preparation for them, reduce it according to their body'setup which gives you all possibility for treatment.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Return the padding over the spot covered in grease and egg white, and place another layer of cloth twice or perhaps three times thick according to the entirety (or possibly just a few folds) of the spatula's width.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	May if the chisel is concave in some of the areas on the plane surface, then you grip that concavity with your thumb and press it down like pressing a lion'thy hand to adjust the level of the chisel evenly.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Return strength from below upward, away from the pressure and tightness of the pelvis within which it is not to be reabsorbed into its location.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the ligament each day; and every time it is softened, apply another application of lubrication, and strengthen your leg if its stone has grown from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And apply pressure above the patient's lap with a hot poultice (heat applied directly over the body surface).
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The text is discussing various treatments for ailments in line with medieval medicine practices and terminology which combines Latin roots, Old French influences, as well as elements from Italian
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed (likely referring to some form of counting or measurement in treatment), then you dissolve the ligament, and ensure that you are secure around those bones from which it starts so as not to fear its disintegration nor removal.  
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	If you proceed from the location of the shoulder and neck bones and apply pressure downwards gently on them, hold it there, then when we have discussed what is happening in the fracture of the collarbone caused by ossification apatite cementation if this occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	The provided text appears to be written in an archaic form of Romance
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Regarding the repair of a bone fracture, here is the translation:
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The thigh bone of some for a while has been broken at the heat location of them and they are torn or fractured there due to movement, perhaps their limbs have become injured during motion.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	When accidents occur and the patient's bones break or fracture with great pain in it, causing difficulty in breathing as well as coughing up blood; these are revealed not only through physical examination but also within their consciousness.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The restoration of him is that his abdomen shall be placed on his back and a cushion between the shoulders; also to tighten the muscles around it so as not to exceed two shoulder blades, and subtly in both conducting the operation and dancing according to all manners possible up to what can be achieved or is necessary.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Here comes the line-by-line translation into English:
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If it is necessary to provoke dismemberment of that which has corroded or burst forth therein, or pain and putrefaction experienced at the location, then you must remove the impurity with caution (using your hands), correct what was caused by water absorbed in moisture for healing purposes; also adjust the bandage if necessary to face it towards the body. Adjust until the constriction within which is cured.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii. (The given text does not contain enough information
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	When the coastline is broken or damaged, such as by erosion, storms, human activity, etc., it can lead to significant
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	When the coastline is broken or fractured, it happens in large areas that are split between two points; and from their extremities of departure therefrom they do not fall directly into those cracks but through water channels which run deep within them (the sandy substrates). Here's a more detailed translation:
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	Upon learning of it, I realize that they are inquiring about its feeling (what is causing their discomfort or pain).
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	The restoration shall be as one can possibly do it with the glue applied and wrapped tightly around the broken bone in this manner, provided that is what he desires for his injury'dicted by them (the physicians).
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the fracture of the spine is declining towards the parts involved, then severe pain and piercing sensation occur therein, similar when you have chest pleurisy with coughing up blood, vomiting bile (a sign), difficulty breathing, fever; this requires difficult treatment.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And when arthritis occurs in that limb of motion,
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	From them they say: cover the foods of bloat that bring inflammation and movement so that the belly may swell and expand, causing breakage to move forward.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	May we drink water to ensure it is not the cause of an abscess formation wound, if you do not suffer from excessive sweating; and if already suffering, here too helps with this fluid imbalance.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: "And those who are weak below and need sustenance placed above them resemble reasoning; yet it is feared that the excess will ascend due to their frailty.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	If the groin is violently contracted and does not suffer from it, press on it with a needle puncture carefully, fearing for the groin area; if they fracture over that place where the bone has been broken (the injury), then stop immediately. Place your hand above this instrument used to preserve life or memory of what preceded its use, which eases and facilitates opening up these joints with ease, allowing you to extract it quickly.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And adjust the wounds of the patient'dict if they are great through compression (care), and treat them until healed within therein.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If you have an ulcerative lesion (acidēs), then apply pressure with your fingers on the affected spot and rest over the area so that it is healed by what covers the sore, which in this case would be water-soaked linens or similar coverings.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	When he lies upon his back under which it will be cured.
Capitol .ix.	Given that "Capitol" likely refers to an index or
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	The restoration of a thoracic and lumbar vertebrae fracture typically involves medical intervention aimed at stabilizing the spine, relieving pain, promoting he
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	In cases of thoracic and lumbar vertebrae (those in the chest/back region) breaks, postural adjustments are often necessary to support these bones properly after a fracture has occurred. Such measures help maintain alignment similar to that which spondils or backbones naturally provide for each other's structural integrity and functioning within the vertebral column (spine
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	When assessing whether a bone fracture is healing or not after such an intervention and considering the patient's pain level—if they have become numb (mollified) and lifeless/inanimate, indicating no further action can be taken to extend their life. In this state of immobilization with pins inserted where necessary for stability ('their nails') when tightly bound together by bandages or restraints in these dire circumstances; the wisdom dictates that there is nothing more we can do: they are beyond saving, and thus death becomes an unavoidable outcome.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	If those are felt in those places and through holes/punctures, then you know the bone of the body is saved and humors get cured.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	If you see that there are signs of water in the patient'supine column and wish to know if it is curable or not, then pay attention to their feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you find yourself already soothed, apply to those waters where it happened, and when your two legs are on top of them (lying down), breathing takes place with urination in accordance with one's will; some even roll over onto their backs for relief, realizing that they are mortal beings, hence not participating actively in the treatment.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If there is not any cause found for those things, then the cause will be worse and more painful.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And for its treatment is that you perform a self-cure applied on the scab crust or with cold water drops, moistened at times throughout the day until the application numbs the wart; pause over it occasionally during the day while the application dulls.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And when one of the cushions providing comfort and existing, rests upon that limb where pain is inflicting torture; commanding malaute (the uterus) to take a pause for repose and tranquility so it does not sleep on the part from which suffering arises until healing occurs.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If you fracture the bone of the joint or any cause that has already separated it from its position, then apply pressure on the spine where this breaks and press upon the affected bone; adjust the lips of the wound if large, suture if necessary, taking care to treat the injured flesh within while ensuring healing.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the lower part of the bone breaks and it is the time of the womb's flow, then place your hand on its left side at the bottom below in line with each other; if you find difficulty digesting these things among them (the broken parts), apply pressure above where they are fixed together by nails or metal fasteners (if present) and strengthen it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel splintered pieces in it (the body), then touch that area and apply pressure to it, and cure the wound with care as has been done before so that it may heal.
Capitol .x.	Capital Chapter (Note: "Capitol" likely refers to
De restauracio de la ancha.	Translation of this line seems to be from a different language, possibly Latin or Italian due to the
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the large ones are broken, and if they break, their fracture is not just communication at those extremities; these enter into length and decline to parts (likely referring to joints or ends), where pain occurs in that location due to a cracking sound upon breaking. The cushion becomes stunned when the bone breaks.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The restoration of him is that you stretch your hand over where it'suponesthe formofhim, specificallywhere thereis a break or fracture in his body structure.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the bone is broken in such a way that it only requires one to gently apply pressure where you have already supported with your arm, then do so until the part returns naturally to its shape while being held by an equilibrated application of force through engagement (application) into the body.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	If the fracture is long or already descending into the body parts, then you shall cry out about it to your belly inside wherein you are getting ready for the repair of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	So when you have applied the plaster to it, pause over that splinter of wood or bone here, and be stringent about this area where one need not fear a piercing for a crack or extraction of the spine vertebrae (sternum).
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	May you apply an ointment if there is inflammation present and cease to stretch the affected area until such treatment brings relief, after which pause over it for as long as that second person who preceded did so; then return to restoration of the body part in question, while holding on this posture together with a covered individual.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If your bones are cracked or broken, then treat them accordingly.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi. (The numbering here seems like an
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	La restauració de la fractura del auxiliar." can be translated to English as: "The healing of the helper's f
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	In this line, it seems like there might have been an attempt to describe a medical condition or position related to someone possibly between their shoulders (possibly referring to the area near one's shoulder blade), but the sentence is not entirely clear due
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	If it is broken, the healing of this thing (which could be referring to an injury or a part that needs restoration) should occur through one of two methods described herein as follows:" suggests that there are two approaches outlined for addressing an unspecified breakage. The text proceeds with instructions on how exactly these methods can involve using something like forceps, which may be applied to manipulate the injured area in a specific way—possibly align or hold it during treatment:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	When ligaments are in painful joints and suspended from an elevated position, it is as follows:
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Here follows the malady upon one limb; and apply pressure outside their broken arm within where it will reach the tip of its joint, which is attached to the handle therein with a curve.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The other manifestation is that the humour becomes superabundant on the lower abdomen and suspends from below the neck, held by two ministers who command it with their tongues (from where it comes), one above its head; another holds near to his body. Each of them extends at will towards the parting they wish.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	If you wish to stretch the extension further, then hold it together with bandages on the break and another suture threaded through them; by these two servants extending over their respective limbs.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is near the limb' extrinsic part, then let it be stopped by placing one cushion on the joint and another immediately after addressing the fracture at once with your hand.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And if the fracture is provided for the hollow (or cavity of the thigh), then it should be placed on that spot and over that area, holding in place with a ligament or bandage.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If you cauterize the ulceration now (today), let it remain within a day and place bandaged wax padding on top of it for today night as well; rest there until tomorrow'thy strength returns then tighten that treatment furthermore.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the armor is what stops bleeding on the fracture, and wrapping of the cloth over the bandage around it; positioning your hand above that area to prevent blood from spilling out into the limb.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Pause the drape and strength over the assistant'se arm, that it may remain in place of braces if you prevent any cause from breaking the bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	When they use tweezers.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation:
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Return strength over the bones at which I mentioned as having tightness, during the assessment of the patient's thorax.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	When your constriction at the site of the fracture is pushed out straightly.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	When I extended the length of the fracture or lesser contracture,
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And if you see the situation of the bones and tightness as we have discussed at this time for restoring the limb to its state, then do so accordingly.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	If you fear amputation, then loosen the constriction and stones within for seven days as we have discussed.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Here comes the translation:
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If today there is not any cause for the fluid accumulation (edema), then do not remove the ligature until three days or more have passed.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let his malady of humors lie on top of their two legs and have their hands resting upon the belly (stomach).
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	Pause over the assistant cooked fully with wool and consider throughout the day whether not be lost or dissipated of a broken limb'neltern part is softened by leather; thus correct your intention accordingly.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	E pause the food of malaute according to the order we have, so that the food remains subtle during consumption, and when it grows fattiness from your body.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	According to custom, these servants should be strong in four days; and when they become weakened, apply oil baths and bandages made of wax which correct it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	If there is a crack that has become hardened, do not attempt to separate it from the ligaments and splints until within ten days or two months.
Capitol .xii.	The provided Latin-influenced medieval text seems complex due to its mix of
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Based on your input, it appears that you are referring to the treatment for a broken arm (fracture).
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	Breaking down the sentence for a better understanding:  
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	When either of the larger or smaller fire (i.thyroid gland) is broken only by itself and torn apart entirely:
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	When the small fire beneath is broken, then restoration and healing of him will be easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	When the fire of it breaks down long enough for its breakage becomes bad, and healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	When that which came from it was broken two or more bones,
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	So if the bone that you broke is the small of above (belly or thorax), it's convenient for a doctor to restore it, which will slightly extend its position until such time when this can be done properly by him/her.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	If the great fire is what causes it (the condition), then when I push outward forcefully with my hand, stop immediately.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	If the two fever spots are joined together, then when you release pressure from pulling out (implying some form of medical procedure), do it forcefully.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	When the figure of the hand must be restored and extended over a pillow, place it on their legs' parts, as well as all others are placed therein; put your ear at the base of these other items, and lay the malady upon a lowered platform.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And if a hernia is present within or beneath it (the patient), then ensure that the protruding organ does not worsen its condition.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Return (or bring back) the minister extends his arm from where it was pulled down towards his shoulder or around his collarbone, and another official also stands outwardly like him.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Once the doctor has grasped the bone inside that reduces it back into its proper shape, doing so according to what they can best manage or manipulate.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	If in the bone structure you have caused displacement or misalignment, then proceed with treatment throughout your entire body at this moment while maintaining focus on where it is necessary for proper alignment under your vigilance and care.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	If there appears in you an obstinate stone that pushes the spine and it is not within your hope for its restoration as we have described above, then act upon it herein according to our direction.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	May it be that if the bone is broken and has entered into a single drop of water (i.thyroid gland), then take care of this very one (the patient).
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If you have an abscess on the patient's abdomen and decide to lance it for treatment, then tie a cloth soaked in oil and white wax around that area until the abscess subsides; afterwards remove the cloth and apply plaster made of talcum powder mixed with clay from the hearth, placing pressure bandages on top. Then you tighten those pressures bands above where fracture points were placed yesterday and today, securing them firmly to stabilize the injury site.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And be aware that the name of the bones in the arm is found in its major arrangements or a fracture at one or two points on the focus.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Here are the translations line by line:
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the body part in question today (considering "el" as eligible for translation like this due to context). Here is the translated line by line breakdown of your
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	If any cause that requires correction arises for the ailment you have on this member (body part), treat it immediately as internal bleeding within the tail end of the body, and make sure to bring about its stop until such purging ceases. Here is an interpretation considering context: If there's pain or injury requiring attention in your limb(s) today ("alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria"), treat it as internal bleeding (possibly referring to a serious condition like hemorrhage), specifically within the lower extremity of the body, and ensure that this issue stops
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Leads to immobilization until rest is achieved (until you stop), then return it back to its proper state or position ("torna la strictura"). Here's the translation considering context: Lead to restricted movement within which period of cessation,
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the restriction is relieved and your bones are back to their usual condition alongside an appearance of normalcy in them all around ("es mollificada", "remaugut e semblantz ad aquels"), then rectify that which has been removed or altered from its original position within you. Here' extriction is possibly referring not just physical but also some pathological process, perhaps related to the body’s humoral composition as indicated by earlier lines
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Consider if the nourishment is being restricted and thus preventing proper function of that body part due to excessive restriction; in this case, soften what limits it today (tomorrow or within days), giving small amounts as needed while restoring necessary sustenance for those parts until such supply reaches its required levels. Here we see a concern with dietary and nutritional aspects affecting the body's humoral balance that might exacerbate conditions like gout: Ensure if there’s any deprivation of nourishment leading to unnecessary constriction, then soften what limits it today (daily or within days), administer small amounts as necessary while restoring essential sustenance for those
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If there is no cause within the malady that we have mentioned for it not to be alleviated in two days or less from those effects, then do nothing further inside of them during this period.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And place its limpness in the abdomen due to overactive motion and let it sleep on their backs.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	Understand that this fracture is restored in either xxx days or xxxii days, and all of this depends on the complexity of the injury and the disposition of the body'dictum (meaning) as stated here takes into account both the nature of the breakage and how one’s constitution reacts to such injuries.
Capitol .xiii.	The text provided seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise that
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	When referring to the restoration of the little finger's phalanx and metacarpus (the bones in your hand), this line from a medieval medical text could translate roughly into English as
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	When the little finger's phalanx and metacarpus are broken (fractured), one should not become sad but must be persistently attentive to their care/treatment. Here, "restoration" can refer both to physical healing of bones as well as psychological resilience or encouragement during the recovery period.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	When you have the injury or dislocation of the limb in place and below it there are ten levels equally spaced apart, then hold that part over the extended area for balance support.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Whenever it is necessary for the minister (physician) to extend the broken bones and where there are good connections, do so accordingly.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	When pressure is applied with plaster and thread (implements), if the ulcer does not heal on its own, then apply a stopper stone below according to the size of the area, which you have already wrapped in cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the bruise is in the parts of dissection and appears like a sheet'suponerence (suggesting an illusion or mirage), then command the humors to constrict that spot with pressure using one’s palm; make it long.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	Whenever the body' extrinsic part is covered by cloth, ensuring that the body rests on the palm of your hand and strengthening it next in order:
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in parts beyond repair, then stop pressing below and above stones of that part which has been previously injured on your palm so it becomes covered and tightened; and also cease pressure there where you have rotated your hand between these ligaments.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If you injure one of the knees joints (hips), and it hurts in your thigh bone (femur), then apply pressure with a cushion on top, as well if you wish to elevate it using the small stone from its palm. This way, preventing the fractured part from becoming swolthy or inflamed.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	May it be as when in that joint where the bone is fractured, or at its place indicated by heat, or on the earlobe (auricular), or around the ankle ring (anular), then apply grease and hold there until healing occurs; if they are all broken continuously, rest over each small stone like we do here in our foot.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	Consider when in your restoration the arrangement of applied and opposed caution—that is the operation at hand—whenever you encounter any cause related to that narration of yours as it unfolds.
Capitol .xiv.	Given that this medieval text seems to blend elements of languages from
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	In the treatment of a hip bone fracture.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the thigh are worn down and it is declared according to what has become in that way concerning departure from bed rest and rising upwards.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration of the patient is done such that the ligament tightens over the fracture, and another bandage wraps around their abdomen and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Whenever the minister extends it fully according to its quality where the bone is broken in place of rest,
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If there is reason for the sinew to be stretched at the knee joint (the pivot of the leg), then attach one lashing along the part where the patella bone meets the thighbone, so that it extends within them and another alongside the fracture. Here's the translation:
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	If the joint is prone to dislocation, then it will be sinew bound with linen and extended to the parts immediately afterward.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And if you make the doctor warmth and ease those two halves into each other as they naturally connect in good union; when there is numbness or tightening of a contracted limb, do not apply pressure on it.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	May you alleviate the ulcer if it worsens within days until the sore is healed over, and then return to your care.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The strictness of it is pain: cover which encases the fracture with hard bandage, and fold that twice or thrice, reduce excess; also wrap around what enters inside so that reaches up to the ankle and the root of the thighbone.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	Here the long needle is inserted between the thigh and the change of cloth provided for those parts immediately above the joints where pain occurs, with their extremities being pushed upwards by the weight of the bandage; this motion continues until any excess from the bandage needs to be removed.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Return your pause (or position) over the area of that bone breakage as it were set in place, and a cushion is placed on top of the patient'thy thighbone to prevent movement or displacement:
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Return and fill up the spaces between the blanket and thighs with molasses to make sure that any discharge is clotted out.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Here begins the treatment of a severe constriction from cold mercury above at the site of the break within three or four layers/envelopes; and as you move away from the location of the fracture, your tightness decreases, so ease it with lubrication and moisture.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return your arms' extremities to the parts where they enter before reaching the chest cavity, and strengthen them with their own ligaments; thus preventing dislocation from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	May if there is pressure in the bone where it was set up by you, then cover that second one with what'dict; and otherwise apply pressure on it until relief comes, taking care of its condition which has preceded healing within sight.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And when some measures are taken for this hip joint breakage as were mentioned earlier in the help and arm aid,
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	Even in the process of restoration like this, you will not heal the leg that is limping; and if it' extricated alone, another cushion must be applied thereafter by your hand, for then they shall continue walking on that very foot which was previously injured.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	E understand that the thigh is tense in forty days or a few months and all of this varies according to the complexity of the conditions and available resources.
Capitol .xv.	The provided text appears as if it could be from an ancient or medieval medical treat
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	La frase "De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh" se traduce al inglés como:
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Surely understand that a crack in the kneecap joint can be massaged gently over time.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If you experience a break in the limb of someone else (implying an injury or fracture), it is not simply a crack but rather a dislocation or more severe damage to their parts; and all this makes up one'dictated emotion/feeling within them.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of him is done by pouring water that has been broken from the parts into where it can be collected and then joined together, as far as balance in body fluids allows for ease of use and construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And apply pressure and bandaging over that round stone if necessary, holding your hand above it to relieve the tightness towards water (i.dict for healing).
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xvi.	In translating this medieval medical treatise line by line into English with an attempt
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	The restoration of the transverse fracture (translation: "la camba" refers to a bone, and "restaura
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Translation: Where in the bone (camba) there are two parts - one large and named for its location as "the crank," while the other is small and called a fulcrum; here begins our explanation of how to address such fractures. This medieval text suggests that they were familiar with anatomy, particularly identifying specific bones like those in the leg (possibly referring to parts involved when walking or running). The large part being referred to could be analogous to what modern medicine might
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	Treat with the poultice of healing for these two bones in your arm (translation: "accideys" is interpreted as applying a remedy or treatment), and likewise this cure will restore it to its full function, just like when treating an unbroken limb. The passage implies that medieval doctors used poultices made from healing herbs for both broken (fractured) bones in the arm and intact ones, suggesting a standardized approach to treatment irrespective of whether or not there was a fracture involved – emphasizing restorative care rather than surgery.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If you twist two bones together (translation: "trinczat" means to grip or bind; here it likely refers to an incorrect handling of the limb), then the crank becomes all parts [of the leg]. This line indicates that
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	If you have twisted one small bone (translation: "os pus" refers to any smaller or delicate parts; modern terms might be 'phalanges' in fingers and toes), the crank becomes all these [parts] Dens (translation:
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	If there is a fracture in your big toe, immobilize it immediately, and these are the reasons that aren't under your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And administer stretching and walking exergy and limberity of the joints according to that mannerism.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	Whenever a crack in the kneecap has movements that are displaced or misaligned (fracture), it should be bent and put on a cushion to support its position by your own willpower/effort.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	When there is any cause for operation on the arms, and when you grasp the tongs to perform the entire surgery, take wooden splints made of ash that has been dried after being placed just where those causes have already been paused in soles (i.dict sunlight), as a treatment for pains and aches caused by white palm plantar fasciitis; attach these tools to what is sought with grooves, not fingers, according to the length of that area, and insert them into it immediately afterward.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a lance of wood is administered according to the length of the couch, and it's placed on the couch in such a way that maintains its ability for motion.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Mostly when you make an incision for a break, and once it is made appropriately.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	In each day consider the couch and study its function for that which came today'dictated in previous studies; you must guard against apendicitis and inflammation or similar causes, if any of these arise as a result from what was studied hereinabove, then apply to it immediately whatever is needed inside to heal.
Capitol .xvii.	The provided text appears as if it is from an ancient medical document written in a mix of
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	It seems like the original sentence, possibly taken from another language or context related to medicine (potentially Latin-based given similarities with languages mentioned), is discussing a break in various parts of the body:
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The translation of the given sentence appears to be:  
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	If the bones of the foot are broken and sometimes those bones are lifted between them themselves, then ligament thighs rest their feet on the earth prepared for this purpose previously.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	When pressure is applied to one foot above those bones that are being lifted upwards, and when the heel of each foot is pressed into place so they return to their respective places within them.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Return painful and stopping bleeding in the abdomen using a small table with two covers: place it on his stomach to stop internal flow, where your hands will hold these tools.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Return strength to that part of the body which lacks structure and wrap it along with others due to various reasons for which they seek treatment.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	When three or four days have passed, then unlace the bandage, and crush or set back in place the broken bones or joint displacements, at which point surgery is required.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	If the patient' extrusions are present as boilings (which implies swollen lymph nodes or abscesses), restore those, and anoint them with oil to heal in your care for their restoration.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Apply pressure at this joint crack according to its length and place your pad under it; then apply firm touch on this table that you are recommended for, stretching tightly.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If the patient has fractured two or three of their ribs, then rest on any part of the body covered by a lion-skin drape and stretch the table under the chest'dictly to ensure that the tongue remains in good condition (retention).
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	It is convenient for you that you do not overlook the causes mentioned to you in other accidents we have discussed, and thus I address this water-related incident (suggesting an illness related to excess moisture).
Capitol .xviii.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from medieval medical literature written in a language
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	This line seems to describe concerns about bone injuries related to the hip, pelvis (pelvic), and spine/vertebrae of a woman:
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the female patient is bent over, let her lean on that which has been lowered for her and place their weight behind them slightly.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Here applies pressure on the soles of their feet, and when urination occurs it reduces discomfort and facilitates elimination; return to that position according to what was previously indicated for relief, and back here is returned firstly (to its original position).
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And leave it for seven days or place those things therein; after that, what is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	If you wish, take one oval of sheep' extrudate and stretch it over the patient's belly with a reed canula; insert the bladder entirely into its cavity, then inflate in the canula until the bladder returns to shape. This is how fractures are set back.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	Return it filled with bandages and rest for up to two days after being treated, until healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	When the bones of the pelvis or thigh are broken, they administer to him in his restoration and pain relief what we have retempered into his hipbone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	When it is not hidden in these particular breaks and rarely occurs, mainly to the one whom I have studied extensively with my writings; this fracture signifies directly at right angles for healing and tightening of limbs, so understand clearly.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	When the bandage of wax is applied to the joint while it' extrudes itself, and then wrapped in cloth coverings; let this be bound for three days or until they send these away, at which point it will heal.
Capitol .xix.	The text provided appears to be instructional in nature, likely from an old medical
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	When a bone is broken while it's still growing (in children), the treatment often differs due to the potential for growth plate damage and natural healing abilities:
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	With such an injury in children (when bones are broken), it is to that which you apply the fracture, and usually if the bone has suffered significant force alongside another part of the body or similar object, then immobilize this location immediately with a splint—do so as per your doctor' extramural instructions.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	If the child falls sick and worsens their condition by crawling on them while you lack another cause for this illness, then restrain them to prevent further aggragy, provided there is not yet any other reason behind it.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	When it is time to begin healing the fracture on that day, do not extend treatment unless an abscess forms.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	May you apply cauterization if there is an ulcer, and as long as the ulcer heals within three days (from today to tomorrow), that's when you do it; otherwise, you risk causing bad accidents by applying treatment on day three or beyond.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If your bone is broken and protrudes from the neck (the collarbone area), then you must take care to reduce that which has been fractured, for it will be easier on your hands with a little extension of those parts involved.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	May it not be stretching beyond your preparation, and the equipment of you are in their hands; those tools which have been made of iron, with a length of seven digits or eight (approximately two feet), and whose width corresponds to twice the quantity of grain; thus necessitating that the doctor grind these three or four pieces according to what is required for healing during bone fracture treatment in all specialties.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And be given rest, and in little discomfort for that there is not to strain the comprehension over it during surgery.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is how it goes:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	E fornicat in Greek "lapsing falangeal splint", thus it is small.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	For that purpose for which his limb is raised in order to attend, he should stand on the tip of it (the extended limb).
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	When he returns his bones and has them gently washed within a couch (bed), placing some on the legs' chairs (stockings or braces).
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	So you will need to grasp the limbs of the fracture and if that part of his body is delicate and does not take such treatment, then have someone insert the appropriate tool into that bone which has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	May you not be able to reduce the bone of all that we have applied, then separate and extract from these pus what comes out today by us; or cut off one of your saws for any manner in which it may suit you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Return that which is rough in the bone of hardness and sharp little nails,
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone is reduced (set in place), and you have achieved that reduction, thereafter it greatly alleviates pain which would otherwise be vehemently lamented; consequently, herein lies where you will confer great benefit upon the humpback.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration is complete and the cloth draped undernethy precisely (and) if it's summer, place nothing on top of the soil or any other cause that oil may fall upon it; thus preventing injury and decay from happening herein.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Even with utmost caution not to strain the child at risk of a break, as doctors often advise these measures over time due to injuries or illness that can worsen their bones' health, thus it becomes sickly.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If it is a looseness in the joint that is different from other types of bone breaks or fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the patient is large or ill and fears those harmful accidents that have been recommended to you, causing pain in the area, do not pause over these astrolabes; perhaps they should be wrapped tightly with hard cloth at the site of stars (or bones/joints) where there are them.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When once or twice a day the patient begins to cough, which occurs above their belly button where they have placed a cloth as per our customs for treating diseases, then take away that fabric beneath them and administer medicinal ointments on these spots according to tradition. Here is the translation line by line:
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And when you gather to fasten and consider the leather in each day' extrication time between morning and evening, so that the limb is prepared according to this method for easy insertion of the needle.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the child passes through days without rest and their bra is not consolidated nor detached from them, then you know that they are covering small movements to attempt escape.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	From those satagias (likely referring to blockages or accumulations), the ones that are separated and extracted, which if not removed will result in putting on limbs and causing pain, you must attend to them as best as possible according to what is feasible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If you squeeze the flesh or bones, it is considered swelling or rot and decay; therefore, pause on one of those things which are required for treatment as described in this text before I have explained them to you.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	From the water in which my speech and presence reside: when they crush your body as those of thighs and helper/assistant, do not think to draw it out nor remove from its source continuously flowing acrid waters that lead directly to death; have mercy on whoever enters therein. If you see someone inside, then heal them if possible within twenty days or thirty; otherwise, take no further action about it.
Capitol .xx.	Captital .xx.: This line appears incomplete or potentially out of context
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	This medieval medical treatise fragment, written in a language that blends Latin with elements reminiscent of Italian and other Romance languages, seems to deal with the healing process for injuries such as joint pain or bone fractures
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	The above medieval medical text discusses the continuous curing of a joint (this may refer to healing cartilage in a fractured bone) at the site of mending from a break, predominantly near connections or junctures within the body's structure. It appears that care is essential for these areas as they are associated with movement and function which heavily relies on proper joint integrity – hence why it’suprahibido in keeping them well-maintained to preserve natural operation of a limb; restraint here implies careful attention or possibly immobilization techniques used by physicians.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Now consider if the nodulation is recent and administer those remedies that have stippedax arsecix aloen (this likely refers to certain plant or herb extracts), ashes, and mirrals applied herein for them; whether a few or all of these will soothe said pain in their area when taken steadily with food supplementation like egg yolk or bread paste. Place this mixture over the nodulation on cotton (or some other absorbent material) to compress it, and tightly bind around therein for good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Allow no extraction that day; and apply pressure on it or other like treatments until the swelling subsides; rest upon a layer of lead for its ability to draw out all the fluid accumulated in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May it be that the knot has been transformed and tightened in this place, necessitating its cause to provoke the aforementioned condition, cut through such excess or protruding parts with precision, remove all superfluity as much as possible until it becomes soft (or reduced), thus ensuring proper drainage. Care for that which is healed within these constraints.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol .xxi.: This line is difficult to interpret as it does
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	When the bone fracture heals and according to Roman law, be gentle with both subtlety of movement and frequency not exceeding nature's course.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is healed, and restore the sensitive part of the body and limbs lightly: at which point it's not pain due to these causes—such as excessive tension in ligaments or joints that prohibits nutriment from flowing freely within; or an abundance of bandaging beyond necessity; or unnatural, rapid movements during one’s time (the proper hour); or swelling in the abdomen and displeasure.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	Care for the excess water involves draining it from the body and making the heart tender within so that its self may multiply inwardly; apply washing, and introduce warmth and lubrication to it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Ensure pressure is applied to the limb so that it draws nourishment back into its normal shape and form within or continues with body fluid seepage outside of itself until restoration occurs.
Capitol .xxii.	The provided text appears as though it is from an old medical treatise that comb
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	When the bones are broken and made rigid, it is forbidden to perform their operation at once.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When you heal the member that has tortuosity and elevation of the bone end (deformity) and entanglement, it is for form' sake; nevertheless, the body does not prohibit such natural operation from your intervention if someone else exists whose existence necessitthy this specific limb.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	May also stand among the doctors and innkeepers, who have used our land for healing purposes; this operation is lost to great fear due to the reputation of what we are performing here.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If leg and joint stiffness are recent (newly occurring), then they may be caused by water retained in the area where their thighs touch, as there are soothing herbs that have been immersed in hot wine or vinegar; similar substances like honeycomb of acacia gum and oil from pomace fruit shall also be applied to this place for mollification (softening). Or it may involve the pus from a recent abscess, as well as flesh leeches that have been crushed into lard or olive oil; these will likewise be spread on said location. This refers to externally prepared concoctions known in apothecary literature for consolidating and strengthening medicines (internal remedies).
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Some waters are soluble in the constant cold breeze that is on them and should be administered exercise for all parts of the body throughout the entire day.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	May it rain today and be hard weather, whereby pain becomes stone-like and necessitates the use of iron for treatment; provided that the pus beneath their cecum has been expelled and bone dissolution continues, as excess fluid from this condition overflows beyond those openings, leading to interstitial ossification below them. And it is administered with ease under these circumstances in consideration of its solicitation due to study needs.
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol .xxiii.: This line appears to be an indexing or referencing
De sermo en dislocacio.	In discourse about dislocation." - Here, the sentence is likely referring to a discussion focused
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is an injury of any joint in one's body, preventing movement and requiring the intervention of a physician; it brings about great pain and serious injuries." - This translation explains that dislocation refers to damage at the juncture or where two bones meet (joint), which results in loss of mobility. It emphasizes both immediate medical attention required for such an injury, as well as its potential severity regarding associated intense pain and significant physical harm.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	So when one suffers a dislocation, they must promptly perform the reduction; if not done quickly afterward, then it gets fixedated and greatly hinders attempting to reduce the dislocation." - Here we are directed towards an urgency in addressing dislocations. The translation underscores that immediate attempts at reducing (repositioning) a dislocated joint is crucial—delay can lead not only to complications but also make future reduction efforts more challenging and potentially less successful, suggesting the critical nature of timely medical response for such injuries in medieval contexts or settings where this treatise might have been applied.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	So if one does not immediately immobilize or splint the area during reduction attempts, it leads to muscle cramps and persistent pain." - The translation communicates that there is a significant risk of complications following an injury like dislocation when proper immediate care measures—immobilization in particular—are neglected. It highlights how delaying these interventions can result not just from the original trauma but also induce additional symptoms such as
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When you wash away the acidity (implying some form of treatment or medication), then ensure that you tighten up inside where it rests again after its healing phase; and secure your limb in water foot baths and oil, and reduce it for ease of movement.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	Every part of it is cured by the water from which its memory will come back in that place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And when the displacement occurs as follows after a fracture, from the upper portion of the body enters into the lower portion.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capitol .xxiiii. (This line appears to be an annotation or reference
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	The phrase "de curar el deslocamiento da mandaubla jozes" translates from Portuguese into English as:
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So dislocated the jaws if not set; and the dislocation of both is according to one of two methods: because there are only a few movements needed for their reduction, or they become completely displaced with additional movement until reduced at the joint' extruding saliva from the mouth—wherein it cannot retain that secretion nor close its mouth, and its tongue wrapped in its own language.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the detachment of it is little, then returns back by itself a little in its major positions.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and finished, then make sure that reduction of it in this place occurs promptly without delay.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If it is difficult to reduce him (the patient), and mostly if both jaws are dislocated, then apply warm water poultice or oil inside the tail canal until reduction of both occurs, so that we have what we need for healing.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they return and their thighs are wrapped up again, the mouth of the malady is not soothed or softened by cloth moist with wine and wax mixed oil, but its pains continue on those clothes made of linen; hence it eases your limbs' muscles.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	When it is administered easily, and you should not touch the opening of the mouth while eating or drinking until the jawbone is numbed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	If the reduction of two dislocated jaws is difficult at any time and cannot be converted during moments, persistently you will have fevers and abundant sweating; likewise, forcefully it aggradicts the abdomen of the malady, and fiercely brings on chills.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	When you take it again, then know that I have lost it; and after a while return to where the liquid fell within X days.
Capitol .xxv.	The provided text is indeed challenging due to its mix of archaic language
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	In reducing the dislocation of the collarbone and the arm' extramittant, follow these steps:  
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not dislocated from its joint at the chest due to continued use thereof; and occasionally it becomes dislocated in another place, which is declared by feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The restoration of him is that the malady ascends upon his two legs and extends their chests.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Return (or apply) pressure at that location with your hand for firm compression, which it will return or restore once done.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Return your hand above that plaster and crusts and make them strong.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	May the extremity that was put into place and continues there is not dislocated on any day; if it has been reduced and repositioned according to what we have said, and as per your equipment.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Return the bandage over that dressing, and compressions, extract it so that the fluid sticks to tranquility and rest until healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	At this moment of care in reducing the limb'seam when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capitol .xxvi. (This line appears to be referencing an official
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	The reduction of a muscle strain or sprain often involves several steps aimed at realigning the affected area, reducing pain and inflammation,
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Here's the translation for that sentence: The muscle is not dislocated but rather in three ways possible; one way being it has become dislocated at the moment of impact, or immediately afterward when movement occurs again (literally translated as "The muscle isn’t dislocated here. Rather there are possibly three methods by which this could be happening: either it's been dislocated upon an eventuality or shock force and also instantly post-movement").
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	The second possibility is that it has become dislocated from beneath the muscle, and this type of injury does not occur behind (near) shoulder joints or due to nerves issues directly associated with them—meaning sprains in these regions are less likely related to a hidden undermuscular origin. Here's how we can translate that line: The second possibility is it has become dislocated beneath the muscle, and this type of injury does not happen behind (near) shoulder joints or due directly to nerve problems—implying injuries in these areas are less likely related to something hidden within the muscle.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	Mostly it is a hidden dislocation that occurs shortly after the traumatic impact and mostly in those parts where there are sparse bones—in these instances difficulty arises during examination; this can be challenging to identify, especially if movement of such areas causes further displacement. Here's the translation: Most commonly, it is a type of dislocation that becomes apparent shortly after experiencing trauma and predominantly in regions where there are fewer bones—in these cases diagnosing may prove difficult; this can be particularly challenging to identify if movement aggravates such areas further.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And when arsenic is applied to the bone through palpation or crushing, and the patient' extruded joints have been put back into place with caution because they are already displaced.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Now when you cry out that something has entered above and exceeded its limit, then proceed with the treatment of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated or has occurred elsewhere, and you make a touching treatment without fear.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	From this displacement it is felt a lighter reduction when cold and the humors enter into the malady.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	May if we have not returned to the way of sustenance that led us here and dislocation occurs day by day; when this happens, take care that the malady is washed in a tailwater bowl and administered with broth made from linseed (flax), fenugreek seeds, honey, and melon juice.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	If you wish to reduce this further: and make present herein a long home that is from there (the limb), and position it downward as far as possible, immediately inserting your muscle quickly between the swelling of the limb and lifting upwards what comes out below, while another servant withdraws fluid from beneath.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	May it be that the thigh is swolthy (swollen), and if there's another cause leading to its being suspended, then when we return this area back into place, it will become so again firmly positioned afterward.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And another method of treatment is as follows: place a long staff under his head with which he takes away figure (perhaps like a mortise and tenon joint), placing it quickly on top of the bedclothes at the end of the stick, so that neither its thickness nor subtlety should be present. The patient's limp is positioned over/under this long staff, with their malady remaining in line along the length of the staff; and they are stretched out body part by part for strength (of other parts), whereupon the joint returns to its proper place quickly due to speed or swiftness.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	If reduction of it is difficult for all the reasons we have mentioned before, then use this treatment: grasp a stick with its length equivalent to two arm'se lengths and hold that at an angle of four digits from the tip of your thumb. The handle should be positioned according to this form on the headrest as per these instructions:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And place cloths over his head so that it does not expose him further to the malady (illness).
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Here is the line-by-line translation into English:
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And have their arms placed on an inclined scale according to the rule, and their hand extended over each joint immediately before it comes together again hereafter.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	When the limb' extrusion is completed according to each possible manner that it may be within your power, and you pause intermittently for its spasm of wool lint quantity; and a plaster cast made from powdered moly and egg white applied over all muscle tissue so as to reverse upward motion, tightening the constricted area, with bandage attached around limb's arm where it is connected at the shoulder blade, fixed in place for seven days without being squeaky.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	When food from excess humors in the body is stopped and rested upon the affected limb, it leads to healing for them.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And if food is given more and its exercise remains firm without softening upwards (presumably the body or parts of it), then already healed they will be.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	May it be that if the joint is dislocated due to humidity experienced by them or for another reason, then in that case administer three kinds of treatments as mentioned in the book on medical procedures.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	If all this pain is present and the ligament or joint isn'thy not closed for seven days, we will remove the bandage and stiffness sometimes over that place with a few movements; it cannot be fixed nor raised at arm segments below, you understand that these are nerves of him who reside in the head (muscle), either deeply seated or spread out thinly finely-tuned.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is causing pain in your pelvis and thighs, reduction is done by force and extension until return to normal position occurs.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When it is administered in that other tight area and cures within which heals,
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	If you harden the limb and slow down its movements, then let moisture baths be taken regularly until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original state of health.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol .xxvii.: This line appears to be referencing a specific section or
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Curaci de dislocacio del coyde": The phrase "curaci di dissegregazione della coscia,
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Care of hip dislocation: You understand that the knee joint is dislocated and seems difficult; it's generally displaced in all directions, especially between or behind parts (thigh), where even gentle pressure does not return it to its normal position until you can see how far out the bone has moved. When realignment of an externally dislocated hip occurs while moving someone who is injured: when adjusted back into place and stabilized as needed according to any shape in which displacement occurred, that indicates movement or contact with this joint cannot be made without severe effort because its structure becomes concave.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	When you cover the wound, reduce the displacement as much as possible so that it heals with cauterization; if at all there is a need for cauterization, difficult to restore completely, and mainly when they are behind in other parts of dislocation, poison from all sources contributes greatly, causing continuous pain until death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And when the restoration is possible—that is to say, that his body has been stretched out and extended by force (hands/arms), and the doctor's hands are on their hips or inside where they hold onto each other for support, pushing at the joint in question until it returns to its proper place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation occurs in the parts ahead (forward), then return your hand to its place where it touches the crotch of his palm upon contact with the thighs.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	If dislocation does not obey reduction, then apply vigorous extension and strong motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	When two ministers stretch out their arms, they hold that instrument between them to prevent it from being overextended.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	When you turn his arm completely over, placing a long cloth or bandage on it, or using the cord.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	When the doctor touches the joint with his hand, apply some oil to it so that these are the causes helping in its lubrication; and then press firmly on the joint until it returns (to normal).
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Here the reduction of his body that is paused upon that layer in which he has contracture and effusion from bile stored up within its narrowing (stricture), with his arm hanging from the chest, being laid on pillows for days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And thus if it is formed at its place in the joint, then cut that ligament and fasten therewith what belongs to it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If you see the joint not strong and swolthy (thickened), then apply bandage and silk thread to it, leave it for several days until drawn out; afterwards remove that same thing.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	May you apply gravity to the reduction of the joint, and its position is in movement, thus applying moistened poultice (wet compress) and gentle friction, until it has healed; or a pause at the hernia'supinant part, which is fatty tissue motion area; bind it up here, placing that same over bone during day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Inside of water bath wherein it is placed inside (or immersed).
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	If you wish to pause over that damp and split cow hole at the edge and stand on it, do so for some time, then that area becomes dry and returns to its proper disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii. (The ".xxviii." part is likely
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Care for the displacement of bones where they meet—that is between the arm and body. (This translation interprets "Capitol .xxviii." as an instruction or topic heading, assuming it refers to a particular point in the treatise on medical care related to joint dis
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The bones of the body have been dislocated and their reduction is laborious; it may occur at other joints where movement speed during the moment of displacement leads to apatheia (numbness) or ankylosis fractures that require immobilization. (This translation conveys instructions on handling cases with multiple joint issues, emphasizing urgent reduction and potential complications like numbness.)
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	For the reduction of a dislocated limb is to hold it off above a table and extend it using those at hand—the physician places their hand or palm on top of impending joint, then pushes gently until it returns to its proper place. (This translation provides guidance for medical practitioners on how to manually perform the relocation process in an emergency situation.)
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However if the palm is already against the chest, then hold them above a table with extension and reduction; but if dislocation preceded this positioning of hand on abdomen, place their own hands intrinsically over that spot to ensure physician'thy touch covers the impending joint—this way maintainer can manage it. (This translation clarifies procedures when medical practitioners must adjust themselves for optimal handling and treatment during a dislocation.)
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns shortly, good be; but if not, that part will harden and become immovable; do not interfdig with its reduction anymore until the days have passed.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	Even though the joint' extrication follows its curvature; and there is no cause related to malady, but rather it has been soothed and cannot be strengthened for any reason—know that your nerves have become twisted or spasmed, and only when properly cauterized with treatment will you provide some relief from the flow of humors.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	So when they return feeling worse (malassemia), place the dressing we have applied upon them, and bind tightly for days; likewise cut their clothing off and exercise it to keep fit.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the patient' extrinsic movements are ceased and pain occurs in their waist or thighs due to some gravity-induced pressure, then apply it with water flow (aqua cauda) and warm compresses (fricacio veguadas), until they recover.
Capitol .xxix.	In order to provide an accurate translation for "Capitol .xxix.,
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of treating displacement of the joints, or as it translates more clearly into English: For addressing the misalignment (
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some circumstances may result in the joints being out of place throughout the entire body.  
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	When a joint of those two in the palm or abdomen is dislocated, then they tighten and push back into place until return (recovery).
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Return and support the head of this person, holding up that which has been dislocated, and keep it in place for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Return that which is above it into its place within today' extricating or bringing back what has been misplaced, as done with the tongue in keeping order during this day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	When the pain is not yet present, then take that second account from him/her and do not cease to separate it during daylight hours and exercise with movement, and take that at nighttime; so as some humors enter over several days until they are cleansed out.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	When it seems to be water in the stomach and if it is displaced there, then perform the first operation with water, so that it becomes healed within.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	When it appears liquid when displaced to other parts of the body.
Capitol .xxx.	Given that "Capitol" is not provided with context or
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	The text appears to be in Latin, which was historically used for medical documentation as well as scientific writing during the medieval period and beyond into more modern times within Europe'
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When any of the vertebrae in the back or neck is fractured and displaced completely (a condition known as a spinal dislocation), movement occurs within these misplaced bones at that moment; however, there's no immediate treatment for this injury, since it can potentially lead to death.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	So that it has been strengthened behind and is not pinkish.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	May the cure for him be that you will consider if the yellow humidity of youth is not a cure or healing from this condition in itself.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	When examining them through palpation or percussion/tapping or seemingly for these reasons, they return to proficient speech; may also have opened the one from which the pad is excused due to its closeness (proximity) to understanding my explanation, at which I will expel and shape various instruments provided by that person in order to demonstrate them.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E dic that in the chilliness caused by parting from here onwards within the hips, it is neither healing nor recovery of this; and seemingly so far as two legs.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	From those it is not healed but that which you apply directly in the water they recommend for its effectiveness.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	When the illness is spread over the patient' extramundane body above their face and neck due to swift movement of moisture for that not should be exposed the chest area.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister holds the staff, and it is not fixed in a hole; another minister takes that form for the other.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Envelop the sinew above the thigh and tighten it with strong bands, extending its length to where you must secure the head; then bind those same bands around the patient's hips using their cushions as needed, securing them in place; and adjust all the bands so that they are fastened together on the other staff which holds up the feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: E propiciate le minister casque expands upon the part of the staff, and not allow two staves and their bindings in which they are fixed, remain shut tightly as before (in English).
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: The doctor places their palms on the spinal vertebra that strengthens within which he adjusts his own weight upon it while maintaining balance, aligning and positioning themselves accordingly over that very same table.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If it does not return through this form, then take a table of which the length or width is three feet (approximately nine palms), and carve into the wall where we have indicated that here malady occupies its place within the extent of the table's extremity.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Place your hand on the scapula (shoulder blade), and let the doctor press their feet onto the other extremity, so that the spondylitis is compressed and returned to its proper place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	If you wish to hold the which has been turned over here; and it is necessary for you to stay on land with your head down below the waist at the end of two sticks, whose lengths are one arm's length each, and where they meet forms a palm-length gap; by doing so in every stick top, there will be someone holding firmly onto the ground preventing falling.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	Once a staff is taken in which it turns between the two sticks of both arms.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	In the limb there is a disruption wherein it forms the staff'dict length which equals a handful of water when turned over, and in both other staves they resemble that one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	Return each one of you and keep them in their place; the doctor holds back the joint as directed by us.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is how it goes for this injury:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And restore it with lint as we have mentioned before, and place the humoral essence within for healing to take effect.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If there is any danger at the place of healing in the end phase of treatment, then it's time to administer medicines that moisten and cleanse for a long period as recommended; these have already been applied here where lead (plumb) has been used for layering.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And at times you feel an impending misfortune in the lower back of the spine due to that dislocation; it is this pain for which we provide treatment here today, and if not properly addressed, could lead to your death.
Capitol .xxxi.	The given text seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise written
De curacio de anca dislocada.	For the treatment of a hernia, it might be suggested in Old French or Latin (common for such
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	It is understood that the joint of the hip and the muscle do not necessarily bend together only when dislocated (indicating hernia), but also where smaller body parts are curved or concave, which you injure there as well. This indicates a recognition in medieval medical thought that areas with structural weaknesses may be prone to similar issues of injury and could relate symptoms observed elsewhere within the patient's anatomy due to such inherent predispositions rather than isolated incidents at just one site, like hernia (hip joint). The translation conveys a holistic view consistent with contemporary
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The hip joint is dislocated according to four ways: at the divisions of bones (which could refer to fractures or other structural damages), in front parts, behind parts, above, and below—the same way hernias might present themselves through various points where there's a breach. This line expands on how dislocations can manifest not just at the primary site but potentially affecting surrounding anatomical structures as well. The medieval medical perspective here recognizes that injuries could have multifacdictional impacts beyond their immediate location, which
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	Most commonly it is at the divisions of bones (possibly referring to joints between them), and rarely above or below—this implies that dislocations involving hernias are more often localized near certain articulations, which suggests an understanding in medieval times about typical sites where such injuries might occur. The
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The name of the dislocation at these joints is when you adjust the hump (possibly indicating an abnormal growth or malformation in this context), which was placed on top and pushed downward with pressure, making it impossible for that part to bend its knee using the tongue. Here, cauterization by a pinpointed instrument comes into play; after being inserted through the coyssa (hip area) directly onto the affected location—thereby correcting or stabilizing what's referred to as an apostema ('fixation'), possibly of some sort in this historical medical context. This translation suggests medieval treatment approaches using manual manipulation and external devices like cautery pins, emphasizing a hands-on aspect aligned with humoral theories where balance among bodily fluids was key for health—a notion that dislocations could affect the body’s equilibrium requiring both corrective action on affected structures as well as restoration of 'humoric' or internal harmony. The language used in this translation showcases not only a treatment strategy but also reflects an understanding (though possibly rudimentary by today's standards) that structural abnormalities and injuries could impact bodily functions such as limb movement
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	When that body which has been set out of alignment returns to its original position, it is because the accidents (or misfortunes) have opposed this displacement.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	When the patient's dislocation spreads from above down to below and they cannot stand on their feet due to pain; urine is retained in them, and a pad (splint) for the leg is applied underneath it - then walk with crutches on your feet.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	Here comes the sentence to translate: The name of that person who has a dislocation at the back parts is such that it cannot expand the sinew nor bend what can already be bent by him, and on his thighs there'se placed a short cushion while another serves them. Here also their joint (probably referring to affected limb) remains bound where needed.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	May reduction of these spices for this dislocation is what you consider, and if the dislocation is old and ancient, then it has already been treated with what you administer here today according to its disposition; thus not all will be cured in that treatment alone. And therefore do not expect a complete recovery from just that intervention.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	When the dislocation is recent and it'm one of the four types of dislocations, then take your tool to reposition that joint and extend it towards both limbs parts as well as their counterparts; carefully return this part on the right side and left side without looking for other treatments.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	May it be so in this intervention, if the patient does not return to life swiftly, then have those preparing for you apply force and extend the cushion from where they are positioned quickly or slowly as needed; another will stretch that same aid over the underside of said cushion. Also deploy a stiff rope (or belt) across the waistband below them so it lies flat, with one attending to hold their hands securely and gently, while others place tender pressure on those points above where they are located; additionally have another person firmly grasping each end of that tight binding.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	When there is extension from the leg towards the shoulder joint or vice versa between the thoracic and second vertebrae (shoulder blade), it indicates movement beyond these points of articulation.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And when their extension is complete within a period of time, until the humidity rises above its place on the ground and begins to wander downwards.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This particular kind of extension is characteristic throughout all four regions.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns due to water we have mentioned, then be careful (be on your guard); otherwise, it is necessary for all special waters that describe their own treatment of care.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In their own reduction, when dislocated and the malady is situated over its chest (its back), keep pressure on the ligaments between the head of the coyssa here where it meets the place from which limbs are extended; also extend the ligament in parts belonging to the shoulder joint down towards the point furthest along that part.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Return another minister with strong suction to the thighs of him/her and compress firmly on the hollow of the malady'se leg, which then returns to its own place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This particular substance is for purulent inflammation, by which this member gets reduced and other species help as well.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	May you be excused from this particular method of healing we are engaged in today; for the two legs at the base of our patient's spleen have already formed a strong bond with ligaments and bones on both sides, above and below them.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	Whenever any part of the body is as long as four digits (or fingers), and when the hernia extends further than two digits in length, it implies a significant condition according to this treatise:
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	Return the hump (presumably referring to an abdomen or swolthy body part) placed on the head of the staff and positioned in such a way that it is above, as much like two braces from Earth's measure.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And order a strong youth to shorten the thigh's head, and have another young man suspended over him by the waist, with yet another boy applying force at his strengthened joint; thus when it returns quickly to its proper place:
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the reduction itself, when it dislocates to the posterior part, where the hump lies over the back according to what we have recommended in the abdominal jelly; and its ligaments are properly placed on the hollow of the hump and on the chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	Each minister extends to its respective area, and the doctor holds his hand over the reduction according to art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you obey the reverse (presumably referring to some form of treatment or medicinal practice), it will be greatly alleviated; but if not, rest over that diligently and have what we discussed previously in gelation proceed therewith.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Mayhaps the patient's hernia protrudes into his thighs.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	When the dislocation is at the joints ahead, then cover it with bandaging as instructed by medicine; and let your doctor'se palm rest on the affected groin area while another hand compresses that side of its counterpart around there until you reach the part where pain starts.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is at the joints behind, do not let the humors spread to the parts immediately below and rise onto the ground; where there are bumps that have been pressed down hard, if the thigh's width has also become dislocated from those joints, then it should be on its face and limbs extended outwards, without pain.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	When compression is applied with a table over the location where pain occurs in the joint,
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So when the reduction is complete, as indicated by—and you should not be afraid of calling it "the reduction," and that's what I shall refer to from now on; extend your thigh cushions (from here), after straightening out those bent ones, expand this position until such time as the limb corresponding to where compression was applied returns to its proper place. At this juncture, adjust the hips and pause expansively with a bandage that's thick enough so that the large does not protrude awkwardly in any of the parts; maintain it fixed for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Return the ligaments and bandages, and compare one strap with another.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	And if you see those contracted in position, then know that the dislocation is already fixed, and so let the humors move outwards.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	If you see any cause of suppuration (infection), return and bandage that area according to your first dressing technique, and apply it again for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Return that part of it, and let them walk on those few days until they are comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Given that this text appears as if it is from an old medical treatise
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Regarding the treatment of a joint dislocation, here's the translation:
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The joints are displaced according to three movements: they can be displaced from the parts behind and in front of them, but not towards the present direction.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The title of the dislocation is that you command the hump to apply its cushion at the thigh, and if it gets dislocated then understands so.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	Here comes the full sentence to translate: And for the restoration of all limbs is that you make an incision in the groin area properly positioned so that, if possible, it extends over your cushion; attach both thighs together with their chest and pause the leg between those points. Then apply pressure on the navel using your palms, placing them there to prevent the intestine from protruding outward again into strengthened position by another servant extending his foot inside until the detachment returns to its proper place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The English translation of each line from the medieval medical treatise is as follows:
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Return the dressing that you have applied to it and attach it to the thigh'supon its cavity; apply these bandages for three or four days, and then remove them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Not use the limb of walking for more than a few days until it is healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If your reduction of the intestine is considered necessary for you (the practitioner), then apply strong extension force on the ligaments described in the previous treatment narration concerning the joint'thy healing process.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any textual information for
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	The provided phrase in Latin, which translates to English as "regarding the treatment of tarsal dislocation," likely pertains to a
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Translation: "Sometimes the ankle becomes displaced due to intervention or because it has become misaligned between the bones, which is painful either in those joints or deep within." This medieval medical text suggests that dislocation of the ankle (talus) can occur spontaneously as a result of some form of treatment and furthermore may happen due to malalignment among the surrounding bones. The experience of this condition, which involves pain potentially present in either superfized joints or within deeper structures around them, highlights concerns for both immediate relief from discomfort
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The sentence in Latin translates to English as "Sometimes the ankle fractures into which it has been displaced." This statement addresses how, following such misalignment or dislocation of the talus bone within the ankle joint—potentially due to medical interventions that are not precise enough in restoring proper alignment
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	Translation: "Sometimes the treatment for returning to health requires yielding or giving up easily and being able to return quickly." In this context from a medieval medical text, it implies that successful recovery after an injury like dislocation may necessitate patient compliance with certain practices—likely therapeutic exergy (efforts) which must be both manageable for the individual ("easy yielding") and efficient enough to expedite healing
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	The Latin phrase translates to English as "In the treatment of ankle dislocation when it occurs again and you need to apply pressure on the thighbone firmly, holding a sturdy hand over that part behind where two bones meet at this spot in the joint." Herein lies advice for handling recurrent talocalcaneal (ankle) dislocations: after proper realignment by applying direct force onto specific anatomical landmarks—namely between thighbones, one must hold a firm grip with their hand to maintain stability at this key articulation point. This guidance likely seeks not only physical
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And place yourself above the patient'thy head and your left hand on their abdomen in the area of the body cavity.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E propitiate thighs with your left hand for two turns, and press it outwards with both hands; make sure that when you lift the chest area of the patient'dictor is performing these actions correctly according to their technique or method.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	When humors are given as directed according to how much has been taken.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Return the chest of the patient into its tightened belly-lug (cushion), and you are at the bedside/bedpost.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if they return to health within a diet or two weeks from this treatment, and if the foot swells again, then repeat the procedure, as that is when they return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If you are prohibited from reducing it (the hernia), then the abdomen will complain about its two sides on earth, and first place a firm mattress on solid ground; enclose your patient within cloth so that they do not see the hernia.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	The doctor applies the displacement to their limbs, and another servant holds the healthy coccyx at its joints, where the displacement returns with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	So when the dislocation returns and it is declared to you that there has been reduction of your limb, then apply pressure externally strongly on that area where the tendon was tied, and bind the foot to the bandage firmly.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	Where you fear or protect the nerves located behind the ankle, to prevent them from being violent and leading astray;
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Return that for two or three days, and if the thread is softening, extend it further.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Return that which is above it today or tomorrow and forbid the malady of rheumatism for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If you have forced it this way here, there is no guarantee that the displacement will not be overly loose and corrupted on top of lacking proper care.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	If you curate an abscess by applying warmth to the place where we previously described it in our accounting of its treatment and care measures, ensure that there is improvement within this location for healing purposes.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	The provided line appears as if it is simply an excerpt or reference number without a
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	This phrase seems like Latin, which could relate to the care for joint displacements of the feet (pes). Here's my attempt at transl
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	The phrase seems to be a translation of Latin medical terminology referring to the treatment for someone whose joint is dislocated:  
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in the joints of either leg over the thigh'softhe knee areaof the body or on a table while it was moving towards you, then cover it with malarum and hold your hand above this position as long as it comes closer to you.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And support the body weight on your feet, and pause briefly over the joints to allow reintroduction of fluid there that has been lost through those connections, ensuring you see if any swelling appears again in that elevated area or not.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return the abdomen of his body a table that inflates completely on the patient's belly; there are two caps, and tighten it strenuously for three days, then loosen this cap and allow rest from walking for several days until he is restored and has sufficient recovery.
Capitol .xxxv.	The text provided is not in an actual amalgamation of Latin, Italian
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	When discussing the displacements that are painful to children or adults following a break (fracture) or in general, here is an English translation:
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any cause of that occurs, and you pierce the cure for it as well as its restoration, success is assured in life.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	Therefore immediately begin making preparations for its reduction in the abdomen as a remedy against osteomyelitis (emphasis on reducing swelling).
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And when the limb returns as we desire it to go back, administer this regimen that will subdue apesta hemorrhage and heal what comes from these dry bandages.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	If dislocation occurs and there is pain in the separated bones, then you must set their joints properly, which will help with the simple fluids that were mentioned earlier at these locations of those affected individuals.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	Guard and avoid according to your will that of the inner being within our fears as guided by my preaching; for these are better from God who gave you life, perhaps permanent in honor, possibly contributing good health during this time of yours.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Ayssi finely polish these lips of Albus, most perfectly by which God does not wish them harmful or offensive to Himself and others.
Amen.	In translating this medieval medical treatise
