Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Ayssi begins speaking about Albuccas.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh children, you have completed this book of medicine before your eyes (the subject), and through its exposition (explanations) and declarations (statements or facts presented within the text), I see that you comprehend what is being discussed here—this part divided by surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	When the operation is considered over in our region and at all times private, until I see you here with my science; and not a single detail escapes me from these small descriptions found freely among Ancients' works, which I will modify to correct errors and understand intentions fully, thus elongating knowledge and art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And I have seen that you need it for reviving the order of this treatise in accordance with its exposure and declaration stages; so as to restore the forms of cautery tools and other instruments used, which is necessary for completion.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	Through what Hippocrates says is at play here, may it be small in scope and mainly within the body itself.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	May we already have told you about it in the entrance of this book; who does not know what we have told them about anatomy, will fall into error and serve death if they haven'thy seen much of these things themselves, for those are formed by understanding this science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Here is the line-by-line translation of the medieval medical treatise:
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	Here comes another doctor who prescribes that the patient drink a stone from a well which had been processed in his state, and this stone was large; brought it to him with a ladle from the water jar, so that by the third day, that home (the patient) died.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you have already summoned that one over here to extract it because of the greatness of the stone and due to its position in relation to the womb, so they will die under us.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And another doctor took the salary of our duke for surgery, and brought with him an iron implement that had fractured his thigh; due to the surgeon's ignorance, he mishandled the fracture on the ground using strong pillows and beds.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	Here is the line-by extralined translation:
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you have called upon it (the patient), and prepared to loosen the ligament, thus obtaining calmness and relief from their pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	Even though decay has been confirmed in the limb, so that it cannot be restrained and will not stop wandering within the scope of the malady.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And another doctor pierced an apendicitis (appendicitis), and it ruptured within days; as the wickedness of him grew towards his lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the head will be cut for excessive melancholalgy (depressed humor), and not all of it shall come to you but rather the member wherein ye have been hosted from start till now.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, boys, it is necessary that the operation be planned in two aspects: one related to health (healing) and another associated with risk (major procedures).
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And so take up your weapons for solicitation and protection, and your illnesses for fortification and strengthening.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	Here comes the translation of this medieval medical treatise line by line into English:
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors,
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	When illness is not arthritis, doctors will not name it.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you already occupy this second volume with three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begins the division of free will, starting from the primary partition.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The ordered first chapter within the feet, in terms of instruments and tools for caulters, what is needed therein?
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second partition.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The Second Chapter of cautery and perforation, and of pills, potions, extractions from herbs and similars for those things, all is arranged according to the forms of these instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the clean cut portion.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third pillar of restoration and displacement, as well as the care for twisting and appearance to these individuals; ordered by the head within the body'supositions indicate a structured approach in medieval medicine towards diagnosing and treating certain conditions such as sprain (twist) or contortion. Here 'capitol,' likely referring to medical practice, outlines three key areas: restoration ('restauracio'), which could mean helping the body recover from injury; displacement ('dislocacio'), possibly indicating how misalignments in
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	From cautery to acute medicine and for remembering the wound (this implies a treatment or healing approach that includes not just immediate action but also mindfulness of past injuries). This line suggests using tools like lancets ('
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	At this point, the practitioner begins to address everything within their control (this implies that at a certain juncture in treatment or
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	Where they examine the quality of both movement and flesh (likely referring to a careful assessment or treatment plan), with specific instructions on when it is not advisable to use such treatments ('cautery'). This highlights an important aspect in medieval medicine: tailored, patient-specific approaches that consider individual conditions. Here 'cauci' refers back to the cauterization tools used by doctors for treatment or possibly wound management
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Thus the topic of cauterization's effect on body and soul is long and complex; subtle by science yet hidden in secrets (this suggests that understanding these treatments requires not only medical knowledge but also insight into their deeper implications). They discuss it extensively among themselves, often disagreeing or having differing opinions ('temen perlonguo'), leaving me just a small part of the larger conversation. Here 'sermo' means dialogue and could refer to scholarly discourse on medicine at that time—full of depth but also possibly shrouded in confidentiality due to its sensitive nature about treatments like cauterization, which may have involved trade secrets or proprietary knowledge among practitioners. This underscs the complexity not only within medical practices themselves (the technicalities and disagreements) but also amongst those who practice them ('temen perlonguo').
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And it is said that the pointed cautery comforts the entire body universally, except for two kinds of complexes which are parts of its matter - namely, tail-like parts.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the complex tail and dry matter it separates; they disperse salves that benefit that part, and others apply them to its opposite, which are not suitable for illness characterized by quality and dryness—whereas nature of the focus is both quality and dryness, making treatment with such liquids beneficial.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And as for the speech of that person, I have already discovered some things by experimentation with them myself.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	Mightily not when the one who has already been examined and practiced cautery on yesterday' extricates themselves from it for further exercise, understanding the complexity of human composition as well as the disposition of diseases within their bodies, along with the causes of those ailments and timing thereof.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	May also occur in other complexities, not out of fear but mainly due to excessive cold and wet humors, which is why all doctors agree on treating them therein with caution.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	May the medicine burn reach that in their limbs which they have neglected and force them to come forth into the diseased member difficultly cured, thus compelling it outward with its treatment.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	May the fire (likely referring to a treatment method), because of its sublimation and beneficial substance, does not produce anything but excess. We have already become known through experiment and long-term study in this art concerning truth about causes; therefore we are excused from lengthy discourse here at rest while holding your hands on the focus area, as it will demonstrate a philosophical proof of our actions performed on the body'dictus (likely referring to curative techniques), which if understood properly can alleviate pain in their pains.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And learned physicians understand that it is best in the early part of the year to perform cauterizations and pauses for the most benefit.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: "And it is said that cautery is convenient at all times, for thus harm caused by water (the fluid used in cauterization) remains where applied and tends mainly when necessary due to pains or necessities such as fistulas and abscesses which do not delay because of the fear of malice acting on them; this greater damage occurring over time is considered worse than minor harm coming through periods.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Even though there are unnecessary tools used in medicine due to the patient'se flow and vitality of operation, as well as the greatness of their lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the illness may return at some time during the day according to the complexity of the disease and its location in the body, as well as what has been prepared on their feet by excess fluids retained from those causes; but if cautery is administered for pain or semblance due to small surplus quantities and humidity, it may also prevent that same pain here (in this place), possibly occurring in the foot.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	Even though it is vulgar speech that we use for medicine practices here, and not the proper language of physicians which I understand as ineffective treatment neither by myself nor by others at these removals.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And now that we use caustics for medicine treatment according to what is commonly understood by doctors and others.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And those made of gold are better than those made of iron for caulters (instruments used to apply heat or fire), and they were not carried unless necessary due to their equality in weight with silver and the purity/sublimation of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	Even when the use of cautery does not produce heat as intended (for that which is used in this practice should generate warmth), they prepare and apply it, realizing its superior quality to iron needles for these purposes; however, if you are using a piece of cautery made from gold at the focus point, adjust according to how much force one wishes to inflict upon silver (the material being used by them). Furthermore, when lighting an ignition in this area, the fire will engulf it. And should sparks fly off as a result during its operation, that is because of the tool's occupancy therein for said purpose.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	Through this water, we apply iron needles and insert them properly for the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And in the instruments of cautery as outlined hereinbelow, they have arranged those within their feet, ensuring that anyone seeking help from them can get what they need.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	From cautery for head pain due to coldness and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The First Chapter (assuming "Le capitol" refers to the
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	 The First Chapter: Here you will apply moisture and cold on the accident wound that is causing these reasons; it stems from too much fluid discharge (likely referring to edema), urgent care needs, ranging from hip pains to elbow movements, prolonged sleeping periods, dental pain, general suffering caused by frostbite, potential paralysis along with hardness and apoplexy (bleeding in the brain), as well-like symptoms within these illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: initially command the hump to be expelled through medical suction for three or four days, according to the urgency of the hump and the patient'sup age and habitus.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return his head with forceps and place that sponge between your hands on a raised bed, keeping it above their chest.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	When you rest your palm on top of your foot, placing it over the bridge between their nostribus (noses), here comes what needs to be done:
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	Whenever the heat arrives from below where it has reached as indicated by that place, this spot tries to expel and with fire (the form of) these pointed instruments used for treatment.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Return your hand and observe the place; if you find any amount of bone in the shoulder that has been exposed (possibly due to an injury or dislocation), raise it as much as there is grief moaning, holding its position either with this one iron tool hereby provided for such purpose, or another. If chilled by cold, enter where you have seen mentioned on bone by the doctor previously stated.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	Return the intestine or hernia into its cavity, and place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not protrude outward. Apply a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the location for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Return your hand over his chest where it has begun, and place that thereon which was destroyed by the focus's blade.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Return care for the location where the snake'thy concoction is within so that it may heal.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And when a patient has urinated (diyser), and the child goes to pour water over their bracelets (geta), it is better for health and may even be beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And it is that they will have their navel cauterized within the body, and hold the instruments inside until some portion of the dissected part has dried out.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	When it is necessary for humors (body fluids) that have accumulated in bone marrow to be drained away and when care must take place, so: the patient needs immediate attention/treatment.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	There are others who come to the crucible through which they will enter and exit into bone (their skeleton), entering while it is tightly closed within until it cracks open; this is how small healing takes place.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	E from that place exhale the humors of the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	If the patient has had it for a long time and if they are cured within that period of being secured or stabilized.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	May I not see all these various cautery tools at once; only in wise homes through fear they are used – and this one should be better for my health if I use it when the head is raised by solace, especially since we have testified here about other members' ailments, primarily when the head of the thigh protrudes naturally.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And if it is possible that this initial form of cautery may save and be more beneficial than anything else, then from that vase (pot) where the water resides, draw some for health benefits.
Capitol segon.	Capital Second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the pointed cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the whole head there is chronic and long-lasting pain, it lies extended within the malady, using swords and scalpels and crown drills and instruments of burning and nail hammers and weights, as well as servants for assistance—mostly if any cauterization has already been performed on one's body with a heated instrument that does not further investigate into these causes. They consider it especially so when the head swelling is due to significant thickening in its nature; but this should not be excessive harm, and thus another form of cautery will then also apply itself upon said area (the one previously treated).
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Return that tool over the top of your head for cauterization, until the penis is cut open.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the bone and expose its quantity that we have recorded and seal it with a cauterium in the back part of the head where it has been called upon (this is also where suction was applied).
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand so high, that you do not see the patient' extricable parts; for when this humoral imbalance causes great pain different from the pains of other caustics applied to the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	Here the lancet is used in its place, so that this very same instrument will be employed to burn away corns on the head and back (where it has been carefully applied), which constitutes its form of treatment.
Capitol ters.	Capital termination (assuming "capitol" refers to
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	In translating this line, it seems that the text is discussing a form of treatment or procedure related to an old method for stopping hemorrhage (bleeding
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When the severe pain of arthritis is present or when there's a kindling sensation within the joint (or bone), it is incumbent upon physicians to apply immediate measures; and they must administer either acute combustion treatment, which I have described in various aspects related to diseases, or application with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May cupping implements of medicine burn so that you grasp a vessel of brass and remove the limbs from both heads.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Return and strike the location of pain on one side with a sharp lance within where it is hidden under flesh for so long that even bone cannot be seen as its hiding place; then pierce therein to alleviate suffering.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Return care for that which is inside within the one where it has been healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	If you come, take some of these burning remedies that you have written about in the book on hot treatments.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the caustic action be with iron according to this method: fire for lances.
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a closed knot or lockpicking form, in which the head of the patient's body part resembles a small rose (carnation), and its position at this place on the body also significant.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Return the pause over the location of pain and hold your hand—so that the iron needle does not harden quickly, which happens when it is used for too long—and turn the small iron gradually by speed to avoid discomfort or injury.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	If the amount of blood collected through the speculum inserted into the catheter is enough for your hand to prevent the artery from being compressed further, thereby avoiding bleeding out (the flow of bile).
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the translation of each line:
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you go, then perform a cautery on the extremity of the lancet according to cauterization and be careful not to make an incision into this circulating vessel directly in its non-ancient state.
Capitol quart.	Capital quarter (assuming this refers to one of four
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Caustic for ancient emigrant treatment." This line suggests a reference to an old medical practice involving the use of caustics—substances with
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat ancient emigrants with what has been said about their cure, and what has been mentioned in the divisions of illnesses; if not improving care, when a pain that is beyond our remedy for topical or cutaneous caustics remains—point to where it lies along this long line which represents its essence. Place your hand carefully within these bounds as you handle cautery instruments (possibly implying the use of metal tools) with great precision and care, ensdicting that even a simple instrument like tongs must be used delicately during treatment.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuous motion of the jaw that grinds its teeth (bruxism), and ensure that there is no strain on the muscles involved in this action, so as not to provoke a spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	If it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery, there is fear in him who does not know what makes it happen and doesn'thy studies or precautions are directed towards that; thus perform surgery on him with care.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And when they come back for memory of the regimen of flow or sanction from the acorn according to their medical practice here in this place.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	If you feel this illness that does not supply the necessary heat for the cautery and affects part of the body (the abdomen), then anneal it at the head'thy place as we have described, and care for the patient until they are healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	If you wish, administer the same caustic that we have discussed in this chapter of thermal acid application using two lancets for better and more effective treatment.
Capitol .v.	The provided text is not in English but rather appears as though it could
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Based on your request and the context of medieval medical treatises, which often used Latinized versions of contemporary languages interspersed with classical elements, here's
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the thorn there is pain caused by cold and damp conditions, which treatment you have described herein for dealing with it; such that no aggravation occurs. It's this cauterization using fire (the pointed cautery) whereby they apply a puncture to address these issues—this being the method mentioned in your text about treating pain from thorn pricks:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Here comes the first source sentence: Apply points at appropriate places, and carry it around in all parts of the body where there is pain—whether on any joint or within any swelling area—using fire as directed by our heating tool (like a rotary massager).
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Long enough is when you use the caustic for the headache'thy need just where it attempts to enter.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	If all points on the entire limb are treated with caustic substances and care is taken for those places that have been cured,
Capitol .vi.	Given that there is no text provided for translation beyond "Capit
De cauterizacio de turtura.	The phrase in question, written as it appears from the context—"Cauterizacio de turtura.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Here is the translation line by line:  
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid using a specialized cautery for such dryness or due to nervous spasm.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that particular type of torture and cleaning the area around joints and genitals without discomfort in your treatment, it is necessary to use three cauterizations: one with a golden hair needle (and likely refers to some form of heating tool), another using small touches from its temple, and finally holding together both lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And apply the pointed cautery on the contrary parts of the ill area, where only healing is seen thereafter.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	When performing cauterization, you apply the instrument at the tip of your finger on the top of the head'se crown and in the temple area; its length corresponds to that of the patient's body part being treated, ensuring that the amount used for cautery is appropriate based on the size of their skull bone.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is how the pointed cautery works and it belongs specifically to barber surgeons (barbers who also performed surgical procedures), which they present now.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	Even though one may have barely escaped, and there is a surplus of excessive flesh on them now; put under it something subtle to cover the exposed part.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the place where this water is currently proceeding inside it so that it may heal.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol VII. (The numbering typically indicates an issue or chapter within
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Caustic treatment of ancient apoplexy." Here, the text likely describes a historical medical practice where caustics—substances that cause
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and the remedy we have mentioned does not confer with your doctor or physician (medicine), who has no fever himself/herself, then you shall perform four caustics: on all of their head hairs; at their temple area where they wear a hat if present; around their forehead and also in the ears.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The action of the cautery is said to be caused according to what has been previously stated.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has been cauterized on the stomach' extruding matter, and may now heal with the water you proceed to administer.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.: (The translation is not directly provided in the
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Cautioning for bleeding due to frostbite: "For hemorrhaging resulting from cold injury." Here, a medical practitioner is advising on the appropriate response when someone
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	They give that which has fallen into cold during large feasts, and they provide pills with a cleansing effect: "Offer relief for items (likely food or drink) exposed to the malaute during significant banquets." In this medieval context, it suggests using specific remedies—perhaps herbs encaps
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Reduce the head of cold (possibly referring to symptoms like fever or chills) and place your hand over it, employing a warmth-generating method as described in their instructional texts: "Lower discomfort caused by colds at its origin on top. Use this technique for soothing that involves applying direct heat according to established medical instructions." This line refers to an old remedy where
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Wait a few days or until the application of caustics is necessary: "Allow some time for recovery; proceed with treatment using caustic agents when needed." Here, it implies that patience may be required before taking further medical action involving potentially harmful
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And if the cold has already caused ailment in this manner (referring back to what was previously mentioned): "If such conditions have arisen from the onset of illness as described." This line
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	So if it is for their own healing (implying self-remedying), then apply three cauterizations on the forehead, which are located between the upper and middle parts of your head: "Thus when they tend to themselves without assistance; but otherwise perform three lancets at different points above the top part of one's skull within its temporal region." In this line, a specific treatment involving cauterization is suggested for individuals who might attempt self-remedy. The procedure requires careful placement and execution by oneself: "Three lancing procedures should be conducted carefully on designated spots over your head at the temples (the side areas near ears).
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And there is space between each of these instruments, and pay attention to what comes from the water that flows into them.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	Might you also consider and the groin allows it take away with the hot tool here at this warm place; and if your addition is greater, then apply caution on these two calluses.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Care for that which has been healed; and use the olive-based cautery according to how it was given.
Capitol .ix.	Given that "Capitol IX" does not provide any context
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	For the treatment of worms and to soothe all parts of the body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	When you process in the head and apply what we have discussed; and properly position your hand on top of the skull, applying salve where necessary for sores there, as well as over all parts of the head, including both halves, and three cauterisms at the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	If it is necessary in the condition of softening of the foot' extrication requires four caulters on the vertebrae of the back, and with them to cauterize that which causes pain from the belly button downwards; also apply these same instruments for internal cautery when one feels discomfort below the navel (bellybutton), lifting upward.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Return that which needs healing within it, and this is for cauterization with olive oil.
Capitol .x.	Capitol .x.: (The given line does not contain enough
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Cauterization of seizures." – This phrase suggests a historical medical practice where the aim was to treat or manage
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	 "It is not cauterized that has been suffering from seizures, but rather it occurs due to phlegm." – This sentence implies a medical theory or belief in medieval times where the cause of convulsions (epilepsy) was attributed
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	 "So that we can cleanse the brain with it at once and for its other curative purposes, as in cases where phlegm is great or when medicine exceeds tolerance." – Here, a treatment involving some kind of substance (potentially an elixir) was believed to be effective both immediately ("at once") and over time. It's used specifically for conditions associated with excessive "phlegm," according to medieval medical understanding that could refer metappective or literal phlegma within the body, possibly due to a humoral imbalance as per Humorism theory prevalent at the time.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	 "If it is an infant that does not suffer from the medicines, administer grease and mustard to moisten the cleaner applied above, by spitting out daily for its digestive benefits." – This line suggests a treatment protocol where if infants are given remedies (likely intended as treatments), those who do not respond should be treated with ointment-like substances like grease and mustard. The application of these agents might involve the patient spitting out any excess material, likely through gargling or similar action to aid digestion – a practice reflect
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then rasp the phlegm from its head (the brain), and apply a heated lancet at that spot on the scalp where seizures occur earlier according to precedent; another heated lance is applied to the back of the skull, with cauterization performed over every part thereof." – This sentence implies an intervention strategy for epilepsy-like symptoms (seizures) in medieval times. It describes a treatment where phlegm from beneath the scalp—believed possibly linked with brain disturbanzement and seizure activity according to humoral imbalances of that era—was physically removed or altered by rasping
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	If the humors are strong and tolerant, then you will apply those same points for paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the back and of the two (i.m., pelvis/hip).
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And when it is necessary for a pointed cautery of olive wood (second), as previously mentioned.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient' extrication is necessary and delicate as per this methodology, then apply caution with small instruments (the term "cautery" here refers to a medical instrument used for minor surgical procedures).
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi. (This line appears incomplete or out of
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	The phrase "de cauterizacio de melencolia" is Latin, and it can be translated to English as
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are rotten and moisture (indicating decay or excessive humidity), then it is necessary to apply caustics for that which has become immobilized in the bowels/abdomen.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	If the cause of melancholy is excessively declining and the joints are moist, then drink what cleanses the brain after what has been consumed during division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Return the head of the humerus (shoulder bone), and make it lie down on its chest over the circle area, holding that place so that the shoulder does not displace upwards.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	The belly is sixteen in circumference, and its flesh has been completely taken from all parts of it.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Return pause (restoration) with liniment; and it is worthy of an ox's wool as medicine.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	When it heats that over the fire for warmth measure, which makes her suffering when she is in there.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Return it within the warmth of their head in the neck circle, and make them enter so that they are chilled (or warmed up).
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	E when the gallbladthy is inflamed throughout the week and within another of its regimens, or if you wish to seal that small opening in the bladder according to what it may demand; otherwise, keep your hand wet with a specially prepared cautery as needed. This type of cautery moistened for equal temperatures serves this purpose (emphasis on maintaining balance).
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Return that spot back into its border or place it in linseed oil.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol .xii." - This appears to be a reference or
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	The Latin-like phrase translates roughly into English as: "For the cauterization of downward water in the wound." Here is the translation broken down line by
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have declared the water content in the wound through your senses during division, then begins and gives to the malady that pours out of it warm moisture from its head (likely referring to an abscess or similar inflammatory reaction), ensuring not all humidity is lost.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	When that substance acts upon it in water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Here begins the line for translation into English: "Make cuts on all veins and arteries, which are below the navel; these will be our cautions in that area within the temple'dictum.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	Guard your wound when it is being cauterized; if you see blood flow from the wound, apply some medicine of yours if available to treat it.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	When one arrives with knowledge of how they are removed from the arch and abdomen, and caution for fluid flows,
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And in some cases, they are cauterized at the joint of two bones with these implements belonging to their hands.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii.: (The text seems incomplete here as it does
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	From ancient caustic tears." The phrase "cauteria lacrimae antiquae" in Latin refers to the treatment or cur
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When ancient tear ducts are deeply infiltrated by humors and manifested along the veins and arteries where they have been previously noted as excessively flowing, it becomes necessary to cauterize this area that was mentioned earlier concerning water cleansing within the eyes. Furthermore, caustic treatment must be applied both at the head's temple region for two temples (likely referring to bones or skull structures) and on top of these in their respective location above ground monuments with dual cervixes; likewise, cauterization is required twice upon each neck—twice over every monumental structure.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	If it is intoxication from excess consumption, then you will burn that entire part of the belly over the tip of the small incision made for cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitol .xiiii. (The numbering here likely refers to a specific
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Cauterization of the foul breath from the nose." This line in Latin suggests that there was an intention or practice
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you medically address that patient who has been discussed but not properly treated up to now, apply the poultice on their forehead for three nights; and rub it against his head as well as applying a caustic specifically targeted at curing blister-forming conditions. Here "cauterize" means to burn or scald deliberately with heat (poultices), aiming to destroy the affected area, typically associated in this context with skin lesions like blisters that are often treated using caustic substances for their purported healing effects according to medieval medical practices.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	When applying that which is for caustic in two lances upon the space above and below each lock of hair, a small amount should be used:
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And watch over your flint that does not get cut by it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	From this instrument of pointed cautery is this form.
Capitol .xv.	Capitolo XV. (This translation assumes that "Capitol" refers
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	From the given Latin-like sentence, it seems you are referring to instruments used for softening or removing eyelashes ("palpebras del huso"). Here is
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelash of a person (huel) is softened by disease or moisture, here they apply this very same tool used for the moon phase to that eye's lid. This appears to be an instruction from medieval medical literature on how certain tools might have been repurposed—or perhaps even invented as multifunctional instruments in medicine at the time:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	If you, cauterize that over the two eyebrows with a small pair of lancets in all parts, and they will lengthen from the nostrthy,
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And according to the length of each cautery as per its surface area.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Do not press your hand too much on the cautery instrument; may it be according to how much the third partition of the eyelid is tendered.
Capitol .xvi.	The provided text seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise with
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	From the phrase "cauterize the patient's eyelids when the hair turns into parts and pick up the patient with tweezers," we can deduce that this line refers to an ancient medical procedure where a practitioner uses cautery (a method of treatment involving burning) on someone’s e
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	Translation: When the patient's hair turns into sharp parts and I pick up (the) individual, there are two methods for proceeding; either apply heat or use medicine to burn them out. The text suggests that in cases where a person has their hair break down into dangerous points ("partes dedintz"), causing injury upon being handled by hand ('pungo le huel'), the doctor might choose between applying thermal treatment, which could involve using something heated (cauterization with heat), or medicinal burning to remove these sharp parts and alleviate pain. This reflects an
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	The line translates as: "If I use cautery (a heating instrument), command the patient to let their hair be cut with these tools, ensuring they are extended and wrapped tightly; if by hand removal is required for those who object ('deves le lor naysement'), then bind one strand at a time around them so that no more of it may come out until all have been removed." Here the physician details an approach where hair (presumably from wounds or surgical sites) needs to be managed, with cautery being used for cutting and binding as necessary. This method ensures controlled removal ("não seja mauguto") in a way that minimizes further damage ('no more of it may come out') until the entire problematic hair has been addressed (all have been removed). The emphasis on extension tightness suggests an attempt to prevent any loose threads from causing issues. This line provides insight into historical medical practices related to wound care and suture application, highlighting how treatments
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	So when women give birth and their heads are bent down as they push in the vagina (the lower part of the body), place your hand on the bridge of their nose so that it is second to the shape of a beardless man's face, which also serves as the accessory for the hair.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Return your hand pressure or touch above in an alcohol-soaked cloth or poultice on the wound.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Return with fire (or heat) the cautery of which this is its form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Return the cautery over the figure on which their face rests; gradually and carefully apply it so that the surface of the penis is completely burned away with juniper oil, all seemingly naturally occurring (or appearing).
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "The sign of health for the eye is that you use your fingers to gently touch the patient' extradetached hair, and their paws are raised considerably due to the pinprick on the head.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Therefore raise your hand and lay it upon this place for three days until the shield is erected within its borders.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Return care for that which is inside has entered, where it should be healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	May it return to its causes and the eye is softened; then apply other points on that whole body as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the hairs are in the eye lids for a time, then heat them up where they have risdicted their original place and into which eyes should not be pierced by nails.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	May the cautery of medicine burn as you command the malady to enter through which are elongated and inflamed, and provide its fate according to the sheet of wool fabric form (likely referring to a treatment or poultice).
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Here rests the medicine and apply that small one without letting it enter into the malady, for a pinch of medicine is in its essence like pressure from focus (eyes).
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	So when you perceive the wound inflicted by the sharp instrument, apply that medicine which it prescribes; once the cutting stops, wash off this same medicine with water as soon as possible after use, and consider whether your eyelid has been raised while being cleansed either due to focusing or incision—if so, ensure that no part of the medication remains in those places where it could potentially be absorbed into yourself during surgery.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Return the padding or bandage over it within which the navicular stone has been eliminated and take care of that part with liniment oil or another inside it to heal, holding your hands on them.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is how one uses myrtle grip.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	Even know that humors in humans vary according to size and smallness, therefore it is your contraction (pain or discomfort) that occurs accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	If injury has occurred along the route of excretion towards that person whom we study in this art,
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol .xvii. (The provided text does not contain enough information for
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Regarding the caulking of a tear duct blockage or abscess in the eye's corner (lacrimal), it is customarily referred to as such by medical professionals, indicating that specific procedures may be carried
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you are treating a fistula (abscess) that has been described in the divisions of illnesses, and do not administer your treatment therein accordingly: then command the humors to cease their movement within it at once for yourself; hold on any minister between its chambers so that neither is drained nor agitated upstairs.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Return your breath control in an herb-filled or lint dressing on his body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Return the cautery with which this is its form.
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which becomes when it is shaped like a cane or sickle blade from the limb on which the instrument (cauter) is used.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	If you go inward into the other limb,
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	If you wish it shall come out with temptation.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	May it be better for that person in doing this work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	When an opening has formed if it is blocked and cleansed out of there, here come these actions taken for that purpose from this source sentence:
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If not unbound, work upon that area and remove the poultice from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Return the hot lancet to your hand that is lit, and hold it at their neck vein for so that you do not disturb your own hands or the patient's mind, and when applying the cauterizing instrument in the throat area and on the chest, break up whatever may be there.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if the caustic enters into the mouth and remains there for three days (or more), as per the doctor's skill, apply it again for a week or so; then rest over that spot with bordered beds and send him to bed covered in dry dressings until he is cured.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If it has passed six days and is not healed yet, then rest on this sharp acute medicine until the bone becomes exposed and as per agreement in their capital city court.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And another method of treating a fistula that is initially performed by finding out where the fistula and applying pressure there, in which form it takes place under its subtle cavity - That's where they pour one lead coin; with your hand over this spot as good containment so that the lead does not reach up to their navel from there; afterward when pauses are applied above the fistula on the belly, which results in welding of mercury at that site and healing by a wonderful cure.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula is healed by the water we have from cautery and treatment, then all is well; but if not, it is necessary to administer pus removal (likely referring to drainage) at its nasal cavity location as soon as possible.
Capitol .xviii.	The provided medieval medical text appears complex due to its archaic language structure which seems a
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Translation of the line "Capitol .xviii." from your original instruction is not directly understandable because it doesn't seem like proper Latin
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	The provided text in what appears to be an archaic form of a language (possibly old Spanish or early Italian influenced by Latin) describes the common occurrence of chapped lips and their prevalence among children: "Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	The text in question appears to be a medieval or Renaissance medical treatise providing instructions for the care of chapped lips. Here's an attempt at translation into modern English, line by line:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	E depending on its subtlety according to the cushion's state.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Return that initial compression suddenly in those cracks where the cautery reaches them.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Return that heal with care so it may be cured within him/therefore take good care of them while they are curing inside their body (emphasizing the need
Capitol .xix.	It appears there might have been some confusion or a typographical error in your request
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	The text you've provided seems to be related to the medical procedure of treating an ulcerated (fistulized) mouth sore, likely
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When treating an ulcerated sore in the uvula or palate, and when it is broken (ruptured), old (aging), causing cauterization of that fistula with a healing agent as directed for its treatment within us; apply therein such ignited substance to where the lesion resides. Withdraw your hand once this heat reaches the protruding part, allowing it time—usually one or two days—for full recovery (healing). Carefully tend that which has been treated here and not neglect its healing; as directed by medical advice for such treatment within you until cured/recovered.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	So if the illness is removed and healed, be well; but if not, it's necessary to discover where and hold back the damaged bone as it comes forth in its head (the tip).
Capitol .xx.	Capital Letter XX. (This line simply indicates Roman numerals
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	For the curing of teeth and softening of gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the veins are softened by moisture and the teeth become rough, cures these with medicines without confining them; then pause at the head of the malady in the belly so that you can apply fire to the form of which it will come forth next momentarily. Place your hand over where it hurts (the painful area) while applying the heated instrument there, ensuring that body heat from the flame reaches the gums and is conveyed into them for relief.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Return your hand (and) return/apply some of the cautions as needed when you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol .xxi.: This line does not contain enough context for translation
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Cauterizaio del dolor dient": The Italian phrase translates to "candling of the
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	Quando il dolore del dente è dovuto a febbre o allo stress dello zolfo (silicone), la cura non si può sopportare dalla medicina; per questo motivo i caldi sono applicati in due modi: come cauterii ai bordi delle vacche, oppure sul fuoco": This Italian sentence discusses the treatment of tooth pain caused by fever or silicone stress. It suggests that traditional medicine cannot cope with this issue and prescribes two methods for using heat as a form of therapy: applying it around the edges of pots (a historical remedy) or directly on fire, possibly indicating hot compress
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Come i bordi delle vacche che tu prenderai le loro lame ferrate per tagliarle intorno ai bordi (implying the use of pottery or metal to create heat around dental pain), and wrap that edge with cloth, enclosing it over the extremity of the tongue. Then immerse that border in fire so that its burn can alleviate the festinantdent's discomfort": In this translation, we understand a medieval treatment practice where metal lathes (or similar objects) would be used to create heat around the gums or jawline for dental pain relief. The patient then wraps the heated object in cloth and applies it directly over their tongue if necessary before using fire to burn its edge as part of an amputation procedure, which is a grim interpretation likely pointing towards historical practices rather
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And apply that heat several times until the virtue of fire returns to reach within the pulp (or nerve) center of the tooth": Here, after applying heated implements wrapped in cloth around and possibly near an affected area, one would repeat this process multiple times—until enough time has passed for what's described as '
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	If you wish to do so below the upper border mentioned above, immerse wool or cloth there, and place it over the sore tooth, placing your hand on that spot until the hot iron reaches the cavity of the decayed tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	Even if the cauterization is at the focus of redness or metal (suggesting an instrument used for treatment), and there'se even a blister in the chest, it shall not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	When the mouth of that patient is opened by this caustic, and its tongue covered for an hour, then this is the form of the caustic.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And when you cut or remove as much as is humanly feasible according to your ability.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is how the cannula (or tube) looks like:
Capitol .xxii.	Given that "Capitol" in this context seems like it might be
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	The provided Latin phrase appears to refer to the treatment of external lesions or wounds, often through methods such as burning
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When external lesions are caused by drippings and infiltration of humors that resist direct cauterization as practiced by physicians (referring here to the use of salves or poultices), you apply a form of burning for these wounds, using two tongs so each tongue can ignite this specific flame. After lighting one side, pause it momentarily over that ulceration; if ingress is desired from either end into where lesion originates (which could refer to the progression or treatment approach), wait until you reach its core point of emergence before proceed0ractively addressing with heat therapy.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the abscess is little, then stop and apply the points according to the quantity of the abscess; place it for three days on a heated bed within which has burnt away any moisture that was present there due to the fire'dictor (sickness).
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And apply care for it with wax and threads and linens inside whereby it shall heal.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The translation of this line from medieval medical treatise is as follows (from most similar languages):
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol .xxiii.: This line appears to be referencing an official document
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	The phrase "de cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz" translates as "cauterization of the knee joint," while "de constriccio de ale" can be understood as referring to
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	Translation: When humidity enters the lungs and mostly when there is inflammation of complexity, then it's necessary to evacuate phlegm through medicinal cathartics (laxatives), and apply hot compresses on that part where chest pain occurs. This suggests a medieval approach in which excessive moisture or humidity was believed to contribute to respiratory issues like inflammation of the lungs ("compleccio"). The remedy involves using substances known as laxatives, possibly herbal ones common during that era (medicinal cathartics), along with heat application—symbolized by "hot compresses" or direct heating to relieve pain. These interventions reflect the medical understanding and practices of their time when specific treatments were prescribed for different symptoms related to hum
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	The translated line reads: "And only a few are allowed access to the hot compresses or those who can ignite (apply heat), not everyone." This implies that in medieval times, treatments like heated applications of cauterization for joints were reserved and possibly granted by certain practitioners—medical professionals perhaps with specific
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	The translated line means: "And that joint is treated differently from the other cautioners at its lower lumbar spine." Here, it refers to a specific medical intervention involving heat treatment or cauterization of certain points along the patient's back—specifically targeting an area known as the l
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The pointed cautery of it cuts in this manner beforehand.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Return care for that which entered before it can be healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capitol .xxiiii. (Note: Without additional context or understanding of abbre
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	The phrase "de cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos" in English can be roughly translated as "treatment for the illness of the
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	The provided text in Occitan, which is a Romance language spoken in some regions of Southern France and parts of Italy and Spain, discusses the treatment for lung disease (presumably pneumonia) without fever or coughing ("malaltia antiqua"), using caustic substances to induce localized heat on specific areas:
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	If you wish, it is the type of cautery that you are calling for, which comes before in the point where pain from arthritis occurs.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	When points are inside them, and take care of that which entered before for healing purposes is taken into account.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	Already, there are three ramparts where you can perform a caustic as such: for one of these, you may apply three cauterizations following this manner.
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol XXV. (This line simply seems like it might be referring
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	The translation of "Cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori" into English, while not perfectly precise due to the archaic and potentially mixed linguistic
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the helper's head is dislocated due to fluid lubrication and does not rejoin during its expected return time, it must be moved carefully as we have witnessed; after reducing the displacement initially, restore the neck position which lies in between your shoulders if that’s where part of the spine (the vertebrae) has shifted outward due to injury.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Returns the pointed cautery back up its two heads, and this is how it appears:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return the appendix inside where that one enters from another, and there will appear the figure of cauterization for those who have stones (calculi).
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus according to its quantity, this is how it should be done:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	E some adjustments are made according to this count and for these reasons, eight times have they been applied as cautery instruments.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If the dislocation occurs above and below these parts, then apply a caustic on the muscle or use one of the cautery points to seal it; thus confirming its position and clearing out humidity (i.dict), curing the malady.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capitol .xxvi. (The provided text does not include enough context
De cauterizacio del stomac.	From the fragment "Cauteria el estómago," it appears you're referring to a procedure involving caust
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When harmful humidity enters the stomach and multiplies within it, if you continue with your curative actions without ceasing them, then this will overflow onto their upper side surfaces where they lie flat (perhaps referring to abdominal skin or other body tissues), spread outwardly, and extend beyond. Here we're describing a situation of inflammation possibly related to an excessive buildup within the stomach leading to visible effects on one’s exterior appearance:
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	If the depth of the cautery equals the quantity of both sides of the gonjals in the colon,
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	E should the form of the cautery be as follows, if you wish, perform a large cauterization at the stomach location according to this shape; and it is thus shaped like a circle in accordance with this design.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And if the stomach has been burned with that very caustic you are afraid of, and it is up to you how much pressure to apply on those points according to what you wish to attempt; also ensure proper care for that which was previously cauterized until healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol .xxvii.: (This line does not contain any text related to
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	The translation of "Cauterizzi il fegato fretta" from Latin-influenced medieval medical language into English,
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	This line translates into English as:  
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	Where there are spaces between each instrument according to its size and where the instruments themselves follow the length of the body' extramainly for proper alignment during treatment procedures.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not put your hand in the lancet of the caustic.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	If the quantity of fluid that is retained exceeds the capacity of the collected bladder amount; and if the swelling remains on their feet; and if it does not subside naturally; then they will press (urinate), which has already extended its limbs, lifting upwards.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	This is how the pointed cautery works:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And when you have the subtlety and prudence in this art, it is possible that you will use these caulters for cauterizing the small incision wounds, which requires delicate handling.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	Here comes the first source sentence: "E guarda te that you do not proceed with cauterization, and ensure that all of your fingers are tightened around it so that they remain within the forceps, where the finger is here present; know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii. (The notation "Capitol" followed by
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	When performing a procedure on the horse's hoof with a pointed instrument, it is termed 'cauterization.' Here’s a line-byse translation into English:
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When the wound in the horse's foot occurs and you wish to determine if it is within the flesh of the hoof or its outer skin (the sole), when such a wound is found on the flesh, malodorous exudation intensifies pain significantly. Here’s an English translation:
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If it is in the hoof's skin, then pain becomes very intense and sometimes even wearies doctors attempting its cure. Here’s an English translation:
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	So that the wound is directed towards the sole; and where there's pain caused by such an apostema in the hoof, heat should be applied to it using the instrument previously described elsewhere on these pages. Here’s what this might mean when translated into modern English:
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And anneal there and in that manner insert the cautery within so much of the spinal column as it can reach before becoming diseased or infected.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And take care of it with attention for healing other appliances inside that is sickened (or affected).
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	Not when using this form of cautery but only that which has been studied in the art of medicine for a long time and is known to treat diseases; perhaps we may dare some experimentation on this procedure ourselves, yet nevertheless let it be done as prescribed by them.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol .xxix. (The provided text does not contain enough context
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	For treating ulcers, or sores in this case – the translation could be: "Concerning w
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	When treating sores according to this method – the translation could be: "Concerning cauterizing ulcers as per these traditions; herein lies your duty with dry arsenical razors for cutting out a long wound found within, and from which flesh is taken. (Note that 'arsenicale' refers to mercury-based compounds used historically in various medicinal applications.)
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Here comes the translation of each line:
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	Whenever you cover your hand with a lump (cauterization), it appears in the symptom of the joints during work on the backbone.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And here they bring forth certain things that are similar to the steel wand and fire used by men in cauterization, placing it where between the ribs until they arrive at this wound there, so as its treatment may be complete just like with bandaging a wounded knight.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	May not fear in this puncture with caution, for it may soon become infected at the location of the abscess which has yet to heal.
Capitol .xxx.	The given text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Regarding the treatment of ulcers (which is implied by "melsa", often referring to sores or lesions in historical
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the ulcer (implied by "malautia"), do not apply your treatment if it is what has been discussed for healing in division and restraint; otherwise, perform three to four lancets according to the length of the ulcer as shown on the figures that precede these instructions. The methods mentioned are all rightful (dreyturieras), referring here likely to proper medical procedures or approved techniques:
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	Here comes the text to translate: Between each lancet or small tool used for cupping, and their manipulation therein is also its own touch; that which we have described in our previous discussion about handling these instruments during treatment of gouty feet.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not place your hand over the caustic; and gout is above its two sides.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And another method of cauterization is that you light both ends of the lances used for this purpose, causing them here in the capitol (center) where muscle dislocation occurs, and holding down the collarbone which lies within the chest cavity near the lower part of the spleen.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	When your lifting is according to the length of the leg, so that they are branded with cautery as prescribed by law (or physiological order).
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Return both garments tightly and cover them with warmth so that they do not enter into the intestine of the other side within these spaces where their knots are present.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Return (or bring back) the points of the cautery; and so they are four cautions used.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	If you come again, then apply three layers of cautery.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And for your treatment, you have placed cauterizing tools that were set on fire overnight (for up to three days), and it may also be relevant because of other preceding causes in healing.
Capitol .xxxi.	Given that "Capitol" is not immediately translatable without additional
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	The phrase "cauterizacio de ydropici," when broken down, suggests a treatment involving some form of
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	This line translates to: And it is not enough to perform cautioning in the foot itself but rather on its joints specifically. This implies that when treating conditions like gout, do
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you heal the foot, it is not enough to perform curing as has been declared in division and does not refer your treatment; rather that which actually performs cautioning should be four types of treatments within the boundary of the body itself – one over the stomach (a type of internal cautery), another on the leg (external cauterization, possibly through cold compress or poultice application containing herbs with astringent properties to reduce inflammation and purge excess humors from the limb affected by gout). Another is applied directly onto the chest; there should be two between the spinal vertebrae of the back (which could imply an intervention for nerve-related pain or dislocation); one at the center top part of the body, perhaps targeting a specific source of internal heat believed to exac0us inflammation and swelling in cases like gout; another over the stomach. There should be two more cauteries between spinal bones (indicating additional interventions possibly aimed at aligning or supporting affected areas), one on top of where it's applied, potentially addressing localized issues directly above that spot to mitigate pain and swelling; another over the stomach. This suggests a comprehensive treatment plan employing multiple cauterization techniques targeting different anatomical locations with specific intentions for each
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	The quantity of the depth (or degree) to which one should apply cautioning is determined by consideration due care, potentially meaning that treatment must be tailored and precise according to individual need or severity—the extent may vary based on a patient's specific condition as ass
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Return the used points with it so that they can be tied for long periods of time using rope or cordage.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	No empty the bladder for healing using the water that flows through it so they may be added to their meals as aid in recovery.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery is such that it has been used before for cauterizing the belly, and this one in particular was previously employed to cauterize both sides (of the body), each with its own distinct form:
Capitol .xxxii.	Based on my understanding of Latin-influenced languages such as Italian,
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	When translating the line from a medieval medical treatise into English while keeping in mind its linguistic characteristics (words similar to those found in Medieval Latin texts and contemporary
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are soaked in water and replete with fluid (implying they're wet), you cauterize them on top of both legs using a piece of hot water between which is found near the earlobe and little finger ring; raise your hand holding the cautery, but do not twist it there. Elevate your hand then again without returning to full position since the fluid in this context seems reluctant (it resists or does not want to drain quickly).
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line:
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	Here comes the sentence to translate line by line into English:
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Lay down the patient's care for long periods so that no water returns from them.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Return care for those causes that have been mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any textual content for
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	The phrase provided in Latin, which translates directly to English as:
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When intestinal contents are mixed with moisture and expelled to purify the digestion and retention functions within the stomach and bowels, it is healed by hands of care without interference; sometimes worms cause these issues, then a large cautery will be applied directly on their stomach as previously done in abdominal cauterization. Moreover: there are also smaller caustics for the delicate interior (of the body), and fine needles to treat internal parasites; treatment is provided over great hernias or under large protrusions, using two types of cautions here within this context.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	If you see excess humors exuding from the body and affecting the intestines and swellings (which may refer to hernias or other abnormalities), then cauterize that area on the belly button and over the swellings, firmly adjusting those cauterizations above the stomach and thighs. This care is effective in restoring health without error.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Based on your provided sentences which seemingly blend elements of Latin with other
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	The phrase "Capitol .xxxiv." appears to be referencing a section or entry in an ancient medical text, likely related to the treatment mentioned above—possibly
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When old ulcers are caused by thick humors or corrupted moisture within the body and cannot be treated with water poured as in division therapy (likely referring to some form of hydrotherapeutic treatment), they require three types of cauterization: one above each joint between two smaller bones, a small triangle shaped area below those same points on their little bodies, and also over the belly button using two dips.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If the patient's stomach is inflamed and their food not digested, and if at times they become constipated, then apply that great caustic upon the stomach as preceded; and on the intestines, another cauterize with a needle-like instrument, and also place one more treatment for the belly'dictor (likely referring to some form of enema or purgative), leaving it applied for some time. Afterwards ensure that they reenter their healthy state.
Capitol .xxxv.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any textual content related
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	When applying the caustic to their abdomen, it's applied with care in this context likely referring to treating an ulcer or similar condition using some form of chemical irritation for therape
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you detach the intestine (atheyl), then apply the caustic that has been prepared in advance on an implement of fire/flame (ray). This suggests using heat or some form of flame-based tool to administer treatment, possibly for a similar medical condition as mentioned
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Enter that fire into the detached intestine (ateyl abscess), and lastly place your hand inside so as to ensure the caustic reaches the opening of the vessel from which the blood flows, indicating an attempt at intervention for bleeding or inflammation caused by infection. Here a physician is using heat while applying medicine internally; this could relate historically to practices such as cauterizing with fire during surgical procedures on ancient medical texts and would suggest direct treatment of internal wounds possibly related to
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Make an ointment or salve (medicated substance), provided they are necessary; then cauterize each one according to their treatment plan, and with care apply the ones you confer upon them in gloves until it is healed – indicating that after assessing patients' needs following contact tracing of some sort related disease transmission ('trops'), healthcare providers would use controlled application methods (cauterization) for each patient treated separately under protective measures. This reflects a standard procedure whereby treatments are individualized and protection is maintained using gloves, consistent with practices in historical medical procedures as well as modern clinical guidelines when dealing with infectious conditions or
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you perform a large cautery above, it may strengthen vitality.
Capitol .xxxvi.	The provided text seems like an interpretation or translation attempt of what could be medieval medical
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	When it comes to the cauterization (burning) of ulcers that are naturally formed in the flesh, specifically referring to parts like feet or legs as suggested by contextual clues ("partidas" often relates to limbs). In English: Cauterizing natural ulcers
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When the nature does not obey the work that has been recommended in its place and the patient is frightened by it (implying a situation where an ulcer or similar condition persists despite attempts at treatment), then healing can be achieved through further burning, i.e., cauterization once more. In English: When nature doesn'thy to obey our prescribed remedy in its place and the patient is distressed by it (meaning when an ul
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	So when anyone arrives and finds an ulcer in the natural way (indicating that this is not just any occurrence but one recognized by nature itself), it's ancient, corroding with both dryness and moisture—a condition deserving of our intervention. Thus we must apply a delicate touch to address how deep within these layers such an ulcer has penetrated as described here (meaning the practitioner should gauge depth carefully before proceeding). In English: So when someone discovers an ancient, corroded wound that is dry and moist by nature—a situation necessitating our attention. Therefore we must apply a gentle approach to assess how deep within these layers such a condition has spread as described here (referring to the practitioner needing careful evaluation before taking further action).
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Apply fire-like for healing, implying that heat or cautery should be used in a manner similar to how light radiates (likely referring metaphorically
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Return that burning cautery there and proceed according to how much it penetrates the fistula.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Iterate within that period when the instruments have just been used for one or two days, according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Return care for the place within that has healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the place is sealed and materials are removed from it, then for a long time you will understand that the patient has been fully cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the materials are not removed from under you (the patient), then know that they have been rotted or decayed in your bones or preexisting conditions, which will be recalled at this location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	The text provided appears to be instructions or observations related to medical practices from medieval times. Here
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	When it comes to the practice of using a pointed instrument for cautery, especially on hemorrhoids (which
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When hemorrhoids cause pain due to inflammation or heavy wind (which could refer metaphorically to circulatory issues), and in order for the humors of the malady's bowel region are evacuated, it is then said that one must cauterize each clustered vein above on which remembrance takes place.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And so soon as we apply the second small burn with caution, three lines of incisions will be made, and thus they may heal quickly.
Capitol .xxxviii.	The provided medieval medical text appears fragmented; however, I will attempt an educated guess for
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of cauterization of the bladder." - This line suggests a historical treatment method where heat or some
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When acids are used in the bladder to debride and soothe due to froth or moisture that prevents malaute from holding urine; they perform this cauterization over the portion of pus on the bladder, using wool for one part (possibly as a padding) while another is directed towards its left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And according to the length of each lancet as per the number on the foot; and apply that one or two caulters in the part below the waist, or two caulters if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And when it is necessary for the pointed cautery to proceed as planned, then do so accordingly.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol .xxxix. (Note: Without further context or understanding of
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	From the provided text, it seems like you are referring to a line from an old medical treatise related to joint pain
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When moisture and humidity come into the womb (uterus), it is prohibited to insert instruments inside of it; this corrupts their menstrual flow, delays its onset, and they suffer pain until relieved—once provided that there's a cauterization at three points around the navel area using cauters similar to those used in urethral procedures. When treating for pus discharge (abscesses), do so with caution: use one or two lancets/cauterizing tools placed over where the fluid is coming from, and if necessary also employ additional three-pointed instruments around these areas; furthermore apply cauterization using clawed instruments.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol .xl. (This line appears to be an editor
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	The phrase "Cauterizacio di la dislocacio d'l'anqua" can roughly translate into English as "Caustic treatment for the dislocation of the
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture moves outward to the part of the ankle joint and these are fountains or effluxes (suggesting a leakage or flow), they cause humors within their location, which is why when compared side by096784321-b5e
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	Where the site of dislocation is located low down (or in a hollow place), here it lies nowhere else but there, holding their hands tightly together with these parts connected to each other.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Therefore apply cauterization to the wound over the area of dislocation as if it were a small circle around where the limb is twisted; this way you will have held back attempts for that specific joint, and with such treatment the affected part may return to its original place in line with the healing center.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And those points for which formulated beforehand are used in the causticization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this cauterization is not with you at hand, then use three large cautery pieces for the procedure.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When using points with the quantity according to the entire length of the intestine, take care that it heals inside there.
Capitol .xli.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	From Latin, "Caustication of the sciatic vein." This line suggests that in this context, there is some form of
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain is in the part of the ankle, and it's caused by excess moisture or putrid/artificial pills, we treat with water that we have here mentioned before (implying some kind of remedy), which is ancient, as you neglect to remove the thick humors within these gross pillows or artificial ones; accordingly, apply cauterization on it.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The translation of each line from the medieval medical treatise into English would be as follows:
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Here come the two surgical methods, one of which is to perform a triple-edged incision according to this form on the part'se width; and it applies at these good depths.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And as for the spaces between each piece of caution, consider the quantity of its bulk and whether those pieces are large or small (cautery).
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	May sometimes there be cautions on the heated area of the head for which four cautions are applied.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	If you wish, cauterize at the place where shape was previously directed during the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle; ensure that it'thy circle remains intact and ignite its entire length along the spine.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is how it happens when pain clings to the joint and does not spread within the groin area, using caustic methods for treatment at that place.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	May it be extended into the thigh, then two lancets will be used on that area where you have introduced malady which is causing pain; and one lance for every four parts of this body'setup to attend each side respectively.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	If there are pointed instruments of cauterization and their depth according to the length of the penis.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	If the malady invades and causes pain within these designated areas of the feet, then here you will perform cautery at this place where it has entered, for up to three punctures or four, as necessary from that location.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If the malady causes pain entering through here at these thighs, then apply this pointed lancet for cutting (cauterization).
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	E everywhere in the entire process of cauterization you should not leave any burns or large incision wounds untreated; they must be attended to above all, on your thigh where there may be hidden obstructions such as a hernia that is present without obvious signs.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already seen another of those who were cauterized on the bone and finally in the cauterization process, the fire was inside where the swelling occurred, a hole pierced through it and ruined everything about the body part.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	When intestinal obstruction occurs due to excessive flatulence in the abdomen, and water accumulation (edema) is present as well, it means that body fluids are imbalanced within the patient
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain occurs simultaneously in two different parts of the same area, then one should perform cautery on each according to this methodology.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	Here begins the description of how to apply cautery for a condition, which is: let it appear like a piece of iron from which its circumference forms a palm-sized circle; and according to the thickness of one'dict or menhend bone, this should be done with your instruments.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Here enters another third point; and it is the space between them wherein lies the quantity of notes from each footnote. These circles are openings in two parts, with their length being a note or two, and they have clothing neatly arranged within these spaces; this represents its form:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Set it al fire within which it darkens and sparks fly outwards; place it upon the division of the belly, with malady covering over its chest area so that intestines do not protrude further.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	So then apply those three caustics in a timely manner.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis: Oh children, of this particular type of caustics we seldom use for looking at you and so rarely find the ones that look upon us.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	May those who endure pain with you use these lancets here and inflict harm on that very place of yours.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	May cauteries be attached to the medicine that you make by piercing an armlet with a barb through which the blood from their door can flow; such is the length of the pledge in their nautical nature, like two hazelnuts or similar things these.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	If the space between them contains as much of their body' extraneous parts and they are excessively large above and below (indicating a swollen or enlarged state), then these should contain themselves in this manner.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	When you raise your hand and wipe away all the humid water from inside her, where there is moisture (wet humor), use a clean instrument for this purpose.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Return the legion for three days and rest on that border where the blackness of excess moisture persists, applying it daily for a couple of days until well-bedicted (recovered). Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return that remedy within where it shall heal.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain extends within the coccyx or scrotum and is felt in the groin area when pressed manually, place it where water can contain (it may refer to applying a poultice with moisture).
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is how gout manifests itself, and I have already written about it in the treatise on medical correction.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkali and cause not extingsup the two parts divided as one, and tear them apart in a new wave wherein the newly divided part is pierced by a small tool according to how much enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	Here comes the line to translate: E so de las medicinas alcunas am les quals es cauterizat anch'a, assai com tecziere ed emma inaccorta e causa mo essenziali che son miscelati.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	E Gualia recounts the operation and healing at which a home from ancient times was involved in treating joint pain of the ankle and sciatica, quite remarkable to be witnessed by that person alone; for no further treatment is required thereafter, provided they rest as recommended, whereupon their leg will quickly recover.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And if it is pressed by certain thorns, or if not expelled by them, a fresh stone will be present; and its pain may originate from where the discomfort is felt—in the hollow of the thigh, in the groin area, or on the limb, lying there.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	When it is laid out for three hours or according to what the melancholy center yields, in terms of weakness caused by an excess humidity imbalance within a person' extrinsic body moisture regulation system (pleural cavity). Here 'melancholy' refers historically to conditions related to black bile, one of the four
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And apply that on their leg so that it is bandaged and thus the foot part of them becomes covered; place it firmly onto the ground or surface where they rest/lie down which then ceases pain and leads to healing (recovery). This indicates a traditional medical approach, possibly using some form of cold compress with materials like mud or clay often applied in ancient medicine practices for reducing inflamm
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	You understand that it is not the one using these treatments with caustics (burns, often involving substances like acid or heat) but rather for expelling matter from the body as part of their healing methodology; this suggests a preference in ancient medicine practices towards more natural remedies and external applications to balance bodily
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	According to Scorcesius (Apuleius), when the superficial vein is cauterized it absorbs moisture from the body; and so with these caustic applications: either a woolen thread or ointment imbued in oil, applied between the sole of one's foot and thigh/groin area to create this treatment barrier. This passage reveals an ancient technique where specific materials were used for topical treatments aiming at absorbing fluids (moisture) while also providing some protective measure against further fluid imbalance in these areas, indicative of a time when medical practices intertwined closely with practical and readily available resources.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Here is the line-by-line translation:
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Return and do not cease applying water until the vengefulness of the knife'falcon penetrates into the navel, then pause the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this one is called a cauterizer of waters (or warm application).
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol .xlii. (The provided text does not contain enough context or detail
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Given that the phrase "de cauterizacio de dolor" refers to a medical treatment for pain, which often
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains are in the two (presumably referring to legs) due to clogging or impact/percussion events and for reasons related herein described, through application of moist and fluid substances used as a poultice. The text suggests that these types of pain may occur when there is an obstruction causing pressure ('cazement' could refer to blockage), physical trauma such as hitting or being hit by something (impact/percussion events might be related injuries caused by collisions, possibly during heavy labor common in medieval times), and for reasons associated with excessive bowel movements. The remedy proposed is the
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And rather than simply using points, employ this specific substance for which you are skilled in making poultices (cauterization here refers to the application of a topical treatment made from pessulgium or similar material). Here 'es fayta' indicates that there is expertise involved in preparing these medicinal applications
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Thus take care of the patient's discharge from obstruction by using plugged or inserted pillows and likenesses (presumably tools for applying pressure, such as pads made from medicinal herbs), which are skilled in being placed over three lines following this guide. Insert fingers into any one line where necessary depending on how much the patient can tolerate of these treatments ('tolleransa') and their state or condition (referred to here as 'vertut'). The phrase suggests a hands-on approach, utilizing manual pressure techniques in conjunction with poultices at specific points along three lines for symptomatic relief. Here the practitioner is advised on how much intervention might be necessary based upon individual patient responses and comfort levels ('tollersansa' refers to tolerance) during treatment ("vertut" could refer to condition or state of health). The text combines traditional manual therapy with topical remedies as part of the medieval healing process.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary for a point of pain (cause), then use pointed cautery as needed/for treatment purposes.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, then apply three or four hot irons in this manner as a form of cautery.
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol .xliii. (The reference appears to be an ancient Roman law code
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Cauterization for the purpose of treating ingrown toenails or fingernails, known as onychogryphosis in medical terminology. Here is
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Continuation of treatment for this ailment in children, where emphasis is placed on dietary adjustments within their immediate environment during the day and evening elevations to reduce swelling as part of mobility management when they move around. Here's an English translation:
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	Whenever there is weakness in the lower vertebra and knees that have begun to overtop other vertebrae,
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you press and intend to prevent from spreading, then apply the pointed instrument used for cautery in this circular manner according to it.
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	That cautery is applied throughout the entire vertebral region of the spine manually.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	If you wish, perform cautery along the vertebral column with points on two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	These are the points made between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Return care for the place within that has been healed by what we have discussed.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	May there be caution that cautery is not administered in a blunt manner but for neuralgia (spasm of nerves).
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol .xliv. (The reference appears incomplete as there is no actual
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Cauterization of gout and joint pain." Here, the term "cauterize" refers to a medical procedure used historically where heat or chemicals were applied directly to an
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold or thickened humours that infiltrate each part of the body; and when such pains occur in the feet—this has been a common practice among doctors to name it gout specifically for these symptoms.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And when gout is healed by the treatment and there are no more pains left over, then apply treatments to remove pain with lancets (needles).
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	When you cauterize that which is expelled within the joint' extrication loop, along with other instruments of cautery.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of that pointed cautery you are using:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then use a pointed cautery for that purpose.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If the pains pierce into the abdomen or other joints and these movements provoke spasms, then treat that spot on any of those parts with three to four lancets belonging entirely to this very cautery set.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If you need more lancets that these lancets are necessary for you, then properly anoint your hand with oil so as not to press too hard on the previous lancer when inserting it nowhere else but at the site of insertion in the catheter.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If pain enters into both joints (hips and shoulders), then apply the previously mentioned cautions accordingly.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If the pains are only in the limbs and it is called sourness (likely referring to a condition related to digestive imbalances), then pricking along the circuit of these flames occurs at those two lines, puncturing them.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If there are residual pains in the joints, then make points on the circumference of each joint and over every knee and palm area.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If joint or muscle pain comes up during the days at the waistbands or thighs, then you will perform caustic treatments on all parts of their helpers (assisting individuals).
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	Not until the flatus from within is expelled with a good regime and reception of medicine, God will help.
Capitol .xlv.	The text provided seems like it could be from an old medical treatise that uses a
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	It appears you've quoted Latin, which was commonly used in medieval medicine alongside other languages such as Italian and French for scholar
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When breaks occur in the joints and when you hold bones together with budels (splints) against the belly button, it is understood that what commands must be given to make gout subside within its day for which reasons should cause relief so that the fissure of one's stomach does not worsen.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Return that to the thighs and head, attempting not to break through over the bones of which section they resemble the base of a circle at the lower parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Return the flame of this instrument (the lancet):
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	When there is reason for urgent intervention and needles are prepared (get threads or silk thread), it indicates that they should be used accordingly, ensuring that nothing
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over it therein in order that the intestine may not protrude outward again. (The sentence suggests a practical approach for treating conditions like an inguinal hernia, where manual support with one's hands is recommended after physically repositioning any displaced organ back into its proper place.)
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between your patient' extramammary (outside of their breast) and now place a cushion under them; another servant supports one leg thereof while yet another rests on his chest holding onto his hands, indicating that you are managing multiple aspects simultaneously for comfort or treatment. This could involve care after childbirth to relieve pressure from the abdomen (cushions and support), as well as hand placement suggesting a holistic approach involving touch reassurance in addition to physical remedies during labor.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	After you have ceased the use of needles on that specific part (indicating careful rest and possibly healing), allow your hands to be at ease there, as they too are subjected nightly until daybreak; continue this routine if it wasn't achieved in the first attempt. This reflects a medieval medical practice where care for both physical body parts like those needing cauterization (treated with fire or other heat methods) and hands is necessary after an intervention, emphasizing rest as part of healing – even mentioning nightly observation highlights how sleep was considered therapeutic. It also speaks to the meticulous attention doctors paid not just to visible injuries but also overall wellbeing during treatment cycles which could span several days or weeks in medieval times, aligning with current understandings of rest and recovery as critical components for healing wounds before re-
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe carefully the condition of the intestine during your cautery procedure to ensure that it does not come out through or cause a serious harm or evil influence on health.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	When you understand that when using a cautery, you do not hold onto your hands, you will not perform the operation correctly.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And when it is necessary for the pointed cautery of children according to its size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Return care for the site of the cautery for three days within which the skin of the focus is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return care for it so that it heals within these oils (implied context).
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The joint (malace) lies over the patient'supremely for forty days until both location and bedriddenness are sealed/secured:
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	When the nourishment is withdradict according to the length of time necessary for healing him so that his belly does not burst out due to it (indicating a dietary regimen or fasting during recovery), you must take care without delay to prevent this from happening.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	When it is time for removal after forty days, then apply bandaging with medicinal herbs and hold that area for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	If it is excess of work and overeating of food and drinks, as well as heavy use, then when one employs this entire healing regimen they will be cured.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And those who have already sealed their wound with a triangular cautery as per this shape, place it so that the skin is tightened upon attempt.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol .xlvi. (This line appears to be a reference or heading
De cauterizacio de torcio.	The phrase "de cauterizacio de torcio" refers to the medical procedure of applying heat, which
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain persists in the upper body through methods like crushing or tapping and does not relieve itself with standard medical care, it is those who perform point heating that are said to be treating points of heat as a form of treatment for relief from this enduring discomfort. (This translation interprets "endeve" possibly meaning chronic ("for long periods") or severe pain and assumes the intended context revolves around using cauterization, which is an ancient medical technique that involves burning to remove diseased tissue.)
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	Whether the application of heat treatments to all parts according to their size and complexity, as well as locations prone to discomfort or pain (torque). Here "tot membre" refers not just body but could imply each aspect related to it; therefore, a comprehensive approach is suggested for addressing areas where there may be torque-related issues. The phrase suggests that cauterization techniques should consider the entirety of affected parts
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore if the first application of heat treatments is sufficient for healing; else, repeat these applications on that body part which appropriately corresponds to where pain originates in order for those who continue with treatment actions (heating) inside this malady area so that each subsequent cauterization aims at curing it. The statement here seems to be about the iterative nature of healing using heat, suggesting multiple treatments may follow one another until complete recovery is achieved within the affected region – essentially an early form of repeated dose therapy or cyclic treatment for effective management and potential cure of pain originating from specific points on a body part. This translation maintains the original text's meaning that healing progresses through cycles (iteration) where each subsequent step in applying heat is taken as necessary until full resolution, guided by classical medical practice principles outlined within this medieval context.
Capitol .xlvii.	The provided text seems to be in an archaic form of Latin or a medieval Romance
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Certainly! The phrase "Cautelezacio di lappresta" translates from Medieval Italian into
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Translation: The scalding for leprosy sometimes requires caution as a great benefit; it is applied only if the species of leprosy results from decay and melancholy (degeneration). This sentence suggests that in medieval times, one approach to treating certain forms of leprosy involved using heat or thermal treatments. The condition was thought to stem not just biologically but also psychologically ("melancholia"), which might indicate the holistic perspective towards illness prevalent at this
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Translation: And when you intend to scald that (leprotic area), consider whether the leprosy is caused by moisture and if it has already been treated with water as mentioned in its division; nor should this happen again, neither here not there—or concerning melancholy which causes corruption throughout all of one's body. In such cases, you must scald that over the head at hot springs (water) or heated stones and afterwards on both sides beneath shoulder pads/brasiers; also two horn-like instruments should be used here—one for forehead hair removal above a stone where water is warmed up naturally.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	Here comes the sentence to translate: And now your hand enters with a small extension into the bone, and their displaced joints are moved back in place so that the expulsion of thick vapors is removed from it; cauterize over the molar as you had previously indicated.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy has already spread over the thigh and appears manifestly, then cover what you are cauterizing with those instruments which have been prepared in your head; apply them to the extremity of the nose, two on each leg's may-silvered orifice (which refers possibly to male/female genitals), two over the lumbar spine segments and two at any vertebrae where leprosy is present. Also place instruments for cauterization above those bone structures which are near your chest, two on each ankle joint, one additional instrument either at a specific ankle or foot region (presumably addressing swollen areas), and various numbers of them over the balls/joints where leprosy is present. Cauterize this area for all junction points between your toes and feet as well as on each heel joint, including at any tender spots in those locations.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	Guard your nerves that are over the ankle which do not burn these.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some treatments are applied with a pointed cautery on the patient' extricated foot and in their mouth for another purpose; each location serves its function as follows:
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	Here is the translation line by line:
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	When cuts require large or small stitches according to the members and joints as previously prescribed by the instruments of surgery.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	When applying the pointed cautery, use rice flour mixed with honey and other remedies to ensure healing within it is taking place.
Capitol .xlviii.	The provided medieval medical text seems challenging due to its archaic language blend; however
De cauterizacio de stupor.	To perform caustication or numbing, often with a device causing temporary immobilization (possibly referring
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any limb is struck or falls asleep and requires treatment by physicians (or healers), using medicine, instruments (and not achieving recovery thereof), then cauterize that impacted extremity with the appropriate tool according to its severeness of injury or minor nature.  
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	When a pointed cautery enters into the depth of the throat with only little force (a pinch).
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And take care that it be healed within what has been applied.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	May not press upon it but that one who is wise in the anatomy of members and exit of nerves throughout the body should do so.
Capitol .xlix.	In order to provide an accurate translation of "Capitol .xlix.," we
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	When translating this line from medieval Latin, which is used in a medical context similar to those languages mentioned (Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French), it's
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When albaras are old and do not conform to the leather of medical wraps, then you cauterize over that which has been previously treated with a heating device according to the amount inserted between the thighs wherein it is swollen (indicative) or discolored. Here, "albaras" refers likely to bandages used for wound care; they are being described as outdated and not suitable anymore if they don'thy fit well with medical leather wraps. The remedy involves cauterization—a procedure where heat is applied directly to the skin or other tissue, typically using a heated instrument (like an iron), intended here for treating old bandages that fail in this role when swelling and discoloration are present within specified areas such as between thighs. The
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Take care of that which is made from bran and chickpea flour mixed with oil roasted (possibly sesame or another type), along with the leaves of parsley, and barley hull ash; each one being a portion combined together thoroughly, then apply this mixture as dressing over where it has been fixed to prevent any further issue. Here "farina de errs" refers to chickpea flour used for its healing properties—likely in the context of an old wound or rash treatment common at that time with natural remedies like plant-based and grain derivatives mixed together, possibly as a poultice applied directly over affected skin. The emphasis on preventing any further issue suggests this was part of homeopathic care aimed not only to heal but also protect the treated area from potential infection or worsening conditions before modern antise
Capitol .l.	Capitalis (if there is an error in capitalization or this term
De cauterizacio de cranc.	The translation of "Cauterizacio de cranc" into English, assuming it refers to a procedure for tre
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When pain is consumed and the liver overflows, they perform that operation on it to cauterize in a circle within its circulation as if it has been tossed around therein with them (the source of discomfort or disease). This suggests an ancient approach where heat treatment was used directly upon affected areas such as the liver. The translation captures both the symptoms and one possible medieval intervention, indicating that cauterization might have been employed
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	They apply the salves that have been previously cauterized in their place of residence (presumably for healing or preventive reasons); however, I have not seen this myself; but it is thought there may be ulcers present here and they show some signs—possibly referring to symptoms like lesions. This line suggests continued care with medicinal applications after the initial cauterization procedure in a patient's home setting. It indicates an approach where treatment, possibly for wounds or other skin conditions (ulcers), continues at home using applied salves from earlier medical interventions such as cautery
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	They place something straight (perhaps a form of medical device or material) that has been previously applied in the circulatory cycle therein with us; either as part of an ongoing treatment method within these circuits at home—or perhaps it could refer to further cauterization. This line implies continued care for someone' extrinsic elements, potentially pointing towards a holistic approach where they use or maintain tools
Capitol .li.	Capitalis (if referring back to the capital letter term from earlier translation
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	The Latin-inspired medical terminology suggests "Cauterization of inflammation" as a potential English equivalent for this
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When anyone is delayed in ripening, and thus it' extraneous flesh that causes this overgrowth happens because of the state of the humors inside them, due to their frailty or lack of vitality, or simply with time passing by; you wish to hasten maturation – at which point cauterization is applied in the body where small points are made for it: and once this person starts craving ripening now.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you wish to perform the operation of this instrument, then heat it accordingly and place it where healing agents can enter through the catheter already inserted: keep that in the warmth location for nutrition absorption within.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the points that were placed earlier are at this location, in order for the leg to be relaxed (or loosened); and take care of what is inside it so that it may heal.
Capitol .lii.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discuss
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	From your phrase "Capitol .liii.", it seems like you're referring to the treatment of ulcers or
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	The provided Latin-like text discusses treating an amebic infection ("corrodens"), which is likened to wood being chewed by fire while walking:
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	So if you see that worm in the place where it received treatment with a small hot poker (cauter), then lightly ignite cauters on the clavicles, and larger ones as needed at that location where the worm is present.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Return and apply caustic herein, throughout all parts entered in order to remove completely any rust or cause of illness there.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Return it for three days, and pause over the cauterized areas until all scars are completely healed and there is no remaining decay or damage.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Return care for that which is within the body'dict causes; this line suggests taking appropriate measures or remedies against internal issues causing pain, likely referring back to treating the root cause of
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	Return care for that which is within the body if and only if it does not rot or decay in its places—this remains healthy by itself; otherwise, repeat the treatment on what has been broken down into these locations. This sentence discusses taking action to heal internal conditions (possibly caused by humoral imbalances suggested earlier) but emphasizes that natural balance is best maintained when there's no decay or corruption within organs and tissues.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Corrosive substances are used in some acute medicine, and that is where the caustic treatment takes place.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	Mayfully with a pointed cautery from pus-laden focus can be treated well (or healed).
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And there it is where his treatment lies in acute medicine, so take that when he has an onset of symptoms.
Capitol .liii.	The provided medieval medical text seems to discuss diagnosing and treating conditions like joint pain
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Regarding the treatment of fingers, and those similar types as well. (Note: This translation is an educated guess based on context clues from Latin-like language structures;
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Regarding the treatment of fingers and similar parts that are called claws due to their appearance or cause when they become swollen from a deep infiltration (likely referring to conditions like gout), as indicated by these descriptions, two kinds of cautery should be applied: one on the forehead/face ("es foc") where pain is felt and another around the base of the tailbone or lower back area ("cauda"), holding hands possibly for therapeutic reasons (this interpretation takes some liberties as medieval texts may use symbolism differently than contemporary medicine).
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	May the focused (cauterizing) cautery be like fire that seems as painful as a wound being pierced by nail sharpness according to the quantity contained in the entire key of division into thin wedges; this is forged from iron following medieval medical practices.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Place that flame above the keyhole and move your hand within the keys of the lock until the cautery reaches its depth inside the lock.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	The text is a blend of Old French with medical terminology likely from medieval times when Latin was also commonly used among scholistic circles, which makes sense given the multilingual context provided in your description. Here'
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply the wax plaster on that which is made from molten paraffin and salt mixed together until it solidifies at one point; this will be done for three days as long as there are signs of inflammation present, afterward if those symptoms have been eradicated.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	When proper care with heated wax made from animal fat is provided within which it becomes cured,
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If you do not convert (or heal), and continue to wander on the surface of the body, mostly in thighs and feet, cover these areas with water or metal cautery; hold a small amount using either an iron needle or a saw blade pinching out water. Place your hand over that area for compression; twist it continuously until everything is covered completely up to here (around the wound), ensuring you seal the nozzle at the bite of the cautery, directing the remaining water through this puncture into below where a parasite might be residing. Wait for about an hour after pinching out with the needle's tip until everything is covered completely up to here (around the wound), then proceed by removing it all as if doing so were essential, provided that there has been some retraction of edges at this point around which a parasite could be hiding.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And if it is necessary for them (the doctors) to enter inside, they will take care of all the parts where pain occurs in their bodies.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And for these pus that are removed from the swelling caused by fluids in which the flesh is engorged, take care of them now with water (or other liquids).
Capitol .liiii.	Given that this text is written in an archaic form of Latin influenced by
De cauterizacio de tremor.	The phrase "Capitol" seems out of context with the rest, which are clearly medical instructions or descriptions
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When an internal tremor occurs in the nerves or due to fever-like symptoms that seem similar, then you must perform four types of cauterizations: one on each vertebra between two intervertebral spaces; another within the spine itself where necessary (perhaps at specific points); and others are done over his chest as well as above his stomach with a healing ointment.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	When the trembling stops and hastens the recovery from illness caused by excessive humors,
Capitol .lv.	Given that the provided text is in an archaic language with influ
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	The treatment of a frostbite injury on the foot involves methods to reduce swelling and possibly stop any bleeding, while aiming to preserve as
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When frostbite occurs on the foot and there are pustules formed from decomposed body materials within them, then it is necessary to apply a compress with mint leaves or herbs for their purifying properties; stretching out this extremity over an open flame focuses treatment—or if that'n’t possible due to longstanding lesions, the wound can be sealed using gentle poultices like plantain leaf paste. Alternatively, a more prolonged application of ointment or compress is suitable for such cases where direct heat isn't safe (e.g., in case there are deep ulcers).
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	Here are the translations line by line:
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	May there come when it is necessary for expulsion through phlebotomy (bloodletting).
Capitol lvi.	Capitol VI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of bleeding caused by a sanctioned injury through an incision made with a scalpel.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Troops led astray often by the artery that is inflamed within them or through insertion of needles into their limbs appear as illusions and are difficult to restore back then.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	So when you apply vinegar (acid), your coit is to be with the underside of ardor' extrication tool and rest upon that area until it stops bleeding therein, ensuring not to displace said blood flow.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And apply pressure with small and strong caulters on the focus (the burning area), by name means, to suck into those contained within that have flames/heat.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Return the vessel from where it has burst to its place and put into that vein which flows downward during fasting what you have drawn with your lancet, keeping in mind for a time when cautery is introduced inside so as to obstruct (or block) this artery.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	If the sanction is expelled from the artery when you move and extract the cautery, then take another lashing of prepared cauteries immediately; thus, do not cease to apply one after another within where the sanction remains constricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	When you do not burn away (the nerves) here that are present and bring them above the thighs or other malevolence.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	E understand that when the artery is swollen and in those tight spots, it's not possible to shrink the vein unless one of four actions are taken: or use an insertion where we place our tools (cauterization), or extraction when necessary, but if limbs come out during removal they will be burned off and the swelling will stop; or apply a pinch with iron or ligature for strong compression through thick layering of padding within their costumes.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	May those who administer a proper restriction of the patient lie down and apply pressure on tightness or bandages at specific positions for reasons of burning sensations and appearances, without causing discomfort.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	May it happen that no doctor or medicine is present, and in this situation attend to the wound as directed herein above with what we have at hand from that vein of which mention has been made; understand where its great mass lies within the division of the lower part by the host (the enemy), over which there shall not be any remnant left behind. Moreover, upon it is scraped or washed in boiling water to remove large congealed blood clots causing swelling and hardening until the wound itself becomes compressed – at this point a cauterization or medical treatment may become necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Commences the second division/part of the treatise/discourse.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and puncture and suction and bleeding, and of fluxions and their likenesses.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are terms from Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	When this process is carried out in this chapter for the purpose of drawing forth what they desire from it, as that which will be asked for by them.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	Whenever you come upon blood and pus in this place, which signifies that it'thy the first stage of cautery here,
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	From all of these things he accompanies fear and trembling, in their chests they experience death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo debeis vos manieyrar homes amb manieyras motas de malautias.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	Of them who are already ill and fear death due to the swift flow of humors from their ailment, and for its prolonged nature that signifies death, so by the forcefulness of these humors leading towards doom, they suffer:
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	From those things that give him his being and form, he hopes for health, but disease is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And so when you consent to this matter that comes from him whose madness it is; let your caution be greater than concealment and your greed not assume any cause for it but the certain science by which you can neutralize it, through whence also will come great praise.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And in their healing for all your illnesses of prediction and indication, therein it is that helps you with acquisition of fame and memory; praiser and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh children, grant your understanding and do not withhold protection from me, for it is within my arm.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And order it distinctly by topics according to what was previously discussed in the chapter of caustics, for healing the head within the feet so that you may attend to what they ask for or require from such and such a thing.
Capitol primier.	Capital First. (This appears to be an introductory statement in
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	From the water contained within a child's head.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You understand that this illness moves slowly in children who are due to be born, and when the newborn' extrudes its head from the child during birth.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	Whenever there are unhealthy consequences due to an imbalance (the cause of which is not clean),
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	May you not see this illness in children but among all those who have hernia and are close to death; with aid I will witness your suffering work on these.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	Even though you have seen that the child' extraterritorial head was filled with water and its head remained constantly swollen within such a time it could not stand on itself due to the greatness of its head, and perhaps also because moisture increased inside where the breath dies.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	This moisture is added between the navel and bone or is deposited on the chestbone, respectively:
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When the operation in that case is moisture between bone and flesh and haemorrhage scarce, then you cut at the place of pain on top or under the chest to make a small fissure therein; this forms the seam.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture increases and the ulcer becomes larger, here are two cracks according to this methodology:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the humidity is in his nose, it indicates that your joints are open and water is squeezed out when you press on this area with your tongue at the parts where they have been divided, which signifies to you that there may be fluid accumulation or excess moisture.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	When you cut into the head at this location, three cracks according to this mannerism:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	Return the intestine to its cavity and strengthen cracks on sheets and wool, applying water and oil inside from morning till evening; tighten the sling and care for the limb with bandages and ointments until it is comfortable and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	Here comes another incision method to consider, which appears due to the size of the ulcer and fluid accumulation (edema), it may occur in the back part or at the bottoms ("occipicii," "partida denant"), right side, or left side; therefore pay attention when you see an appearance of the ulcer and edema filling, do so as soon as possible.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the vein and lymphatic vessels of sanctus y mor, for through them mal aube flows, which is expelled by exudation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Capitol II.: (The continuation of text or content is indicated
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	From the arteries through which blood flows, called in their turn 'hilsses,' these are to be appealed for healing or treatment purposes.  
Capitol segon.	In English line by line translation of "Capitol segon
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When joint pain or swelling occurs at the hip bones or chest, and it is ancient (old), you will not cure with medicine; rather, the treatment begins within these two vessels.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	So when you intend to insert those into the patient'thy head, and flare up the tight place underneath their ashen cloth for them to appear veins, and strengthen the neck of the same garment around the patient’s neck; consider also the pulse on each part. And these locations are hidden only in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	If you wish, insert the strap of wood into the blood vessel and stretch it along the segments below (presumably referring to parts of an instrument or perhaps limbs).
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	When the length of the intestine is two days adjusted, when any vein in the sankey enters excretion pulse, it goes up and down frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	May if the awl does not appear at the joint, then measure the size of three fingers from the auricle (earlobe), apply oil as lubricant and insert it into the mouth.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	When the gall bladder releases its quantity of bile (choler), and it must not be released any further, all that comes out is according to the amount shown by the liver'dictorship and bowel repletion of the patient.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Return and observe if there is any cause beneath the bone, then divide this moisture by yourself to prevent apendicitis from developing an abscess (cursed condition).
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And strengthen the child with wool and linen of cloth, applying care so that it is healed within wherein there is ointment.
Capitol .iii.	Given that this is an attempt at translating from what appears to be
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	When extracting the arches which are found within the temples, it implies a medical or dental procedure focused on these structures of bone in that sensitive area near the eyes and forehead region:
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When ancient acciedae or cataracts come from moisture and humidity in the temple bones (perhaps referring to sinuses), these old soils vehemently imitate those, and we use our hands for healing purposes; thus when suffering such maladies as extraction of arches within temples:
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The operation and extraction of those humors that inhabit the hairs within the temple is what it seems; understand this arterial visibility in your pulse when hidden due to forceful motion (violent movement).
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If hidden, tighten the thigh bone with some cloth (possibly for support or immobilization), and apply pressure to the location covered by such fabric until it appears that an abscess has formed on your part (implying you are observing signs of infection).
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when you take hold of this tool (the lithotomy forceps), it is as follows:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation: And place your chin in that which makes it easier for you to enter into the archery range; and put on shoes thereon above and remove those from the parts belonging outside whereby through them entering out of the jaw, one discovers what are beneath these outer garments.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	May it be that if the artery is subtle, then you will surround it with this and insinuate into that part according to the quantity by which their limbs are elongated and contracted, so that there won't be any flow of blood; provided, however, that they do not get injected otherwise.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	Return (or bring back) excretions from the bladder into three times within.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the artery is large, then take that out to two places down further along its path on either side of the bone and do not puncture it during the solidification of the child' extrusion; thus preventing putrefaction and a flow of pus from occurring.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And apply pressure on the excess that is between two ligaments, and make it happen at that time or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you wish to, cauterize that which is meant for the intestine or hernia within it (the caustic intended), and keep it at the location where this surgical intervention takes place.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E è meglio se il male ha febbre o si tratta di un'escalfatura complessa; queste cauterie sono destinate a quelle cause che aiutano le umiditazioni finali, ed è quindi più utile in giovanezza.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And apply the extraction of humors from within the coccyx area, and place their pauses (cushions) firmly on it, so that you with your medicinal seeds may alleviate flesh and bones until he is restored.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If while working you encounter an outflow of blood from the artery, then immediately try to contract that flow of blood, or apply a compress, occupying its location where it bleeds; tighten your hand inside so as to restrict that flow of blood.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If there is a cause of those that are not present with you now, then pause your search within the place where healing has begun to take effect; cool down and restrain the spot intensely until his fever subsides, at which point strengthen him according to his condition.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	When you have pushed the blood out of arteria, then you perform cauterization with two lances that you have sharpened for this purpose; place them at both locations to attempt drainage and suction, so that when they reach the bones, it causes stretching thereof, which makes sure that no further blood remains outside of these instruments.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is how the cautery works:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	E is the sharpness of both coats examples.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	Even if the patient' extricates themselves and become more sensitive than two cushions or sharp objects typical for each joint area, we shall not cut into their flesh with speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Thus when in them there is any thickness, heat from the focus remains therein and flesh detaches loosely.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better in its entirety and has been made lightweight.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	When it is about the space between two sheets wherein lies the quantity of the said body (the patient).
Capitol quart.	Capital quarter (This translation assumes that "capitolo
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Regarding the treatment of sharp and sour humors in joints, this line suggests a focus on methods to address issues caused by excessively harmful or irritating elements within bodily fluids (hum
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the humors are sharp and sour, it is within those veins above which the head rests that they cause no discomfort; sometimes even the skull seems to shudder as if walking on its own legs like ants, with these fluids exhausting them. At such times, physicians apply special treatments for this operation and refer their use by saying 'for passing,' suggesting movement or flow through a passageway within medicine's practice of caregiving—a delicate procedure involving the skull that resembles ant crawling on its own legs as it moves along. These ancient medical practitioners, masterful in their techniques for such interventions, consider this treatment indispensable to remedy these conditions brought forth by sharp and sour humors within body fluids—a testament not only of the complexity but also of the ingenuity inherent in historical medicinal practices.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	When you command the malady to pull back the hairs that are in its forehead, and place them within three anterior gums according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	If the length of the fissure is two fingers: one that extends from the jawline to the bridge of the nose in the forehead region, and another corresponding to a small movement of the eyes (tears), it belongs respectively hereafter.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	Guard your jaw where the lips meet at two points (the corners of the mouth), and extend your tongue for the continuous movement of both lower jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	If there is space in any joint amounting to three fingers' widths,
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	If you have an applied poultice or dry cloth, place it on the parts where effusions collect; these are what sanctions (or cures) will act upon them with their healing properties.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Return (or place back) between the scapulae of two acute limbs, which is how this thing appears to him.
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	That is from one side of temple entry into the second compartment/section.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excising the entire area between two notches where the navel is located over the chest and applying it to the corresponding incision inside which fluid may migrate,
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Return the knife so that it does not penetrate into this space and another tool which you call cutting is used from one side and doesn'thy use on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	When the pain of gout requires that you take care of its attached flesh and bone by pressing it into place whereby entering through a crack in the body, press therewith all parts down from the head to which tendons belong.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May there be continued flow of urine from the urethra and its application in the midline crack between the other cracks.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	Put that amount of wine as needed into the sanctum and expel from there all the hardened places in the joint spaces of the sacrum with cautery.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Return the pause in any crack of skin or joint wound, and place it over those grains that appear on its surface while applying oil and wine, then watch to prevent an abscess from developing.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And in the third day apply ligature and administer great pouring of warm water or oil, take care that it is done with a clean linen dipped in rosewater and other substances so as to heal the humors.
Capitol .v.	Capital (in Latin): In medical context, this could refer to an
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	From the treatment of wounds for catharsis and the healing powers derived from each division or section under the head:
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When the patient undergoes catharsis and continues with it, and at times the humors of the malady expand into small pains, and their observation is alleviated by this process; moreover, when ulcers appear on their eyelids and in their wounds (from blood), acute pain comes to the forehead unexpectedly afterwards. You understand these accidents that materials and catharsis do not come from motion of distal parts' veins proceeding there.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Remove all moisture or dry cloth from between the patient's lower and upper lips of the small crack at the corner of their mouth, as instructed therein:
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	When it is above in wine and oil, preventing new sores from forming.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	When the poultice has been applied and when pus begins to decrease (indicating that an infection is starting its resolution), it's time for care where you apply warm remedies, as if taking two parts of flour from bread wheat mixed with four parts of honey. You mix these ingredients together and then cover the wound with this mixture while administering internally to aid healing within one’s natural flesh.
Capitol .vi.	In this translation of "Capitol .vi.", it appears that some
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	The provided text seems like an attempt at translating from Old Spanish, with possible influences or simplifications reminiscent of Latin-based languages such as Italian and French
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The translation provided touches upon medieval medical thought regarding the causes of joint pain (presumably in fingers or toes given "aquo," which translates loosely as water). Here's an interpretation line by line:
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when blood appears in the ear or seems like those causes that do not fit and halt the flow of blood within the ear, if you see it therein, this may indicate some form of oil discharge or rash cause, then administer its removal, and induce purgation as needed for cleansing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return pause in the circuit of the artery some folds or wool shawls and extend the artery towards the upper parts above; these movements are performed due to this reason.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If it is not relieved, then administer the extraction of this subtle tool that they use for relief by means indicated below.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If there is a blockage in labor (referring perhaps to childbirth or another obstruction), then be ready for it; otherwise, administer its removal gently with just one small touch at most twice over.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if there is not an opening (forgotten or neglected), then use an arsenic and wax-coated needle, insert the tip of it into the ulceration on the vein's side, sealing with the same material to ensure that only the needle protrudes without any further complications.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	When applying pressure above the belly button for firm attachment, pay attention as you have reported having had too much food consumed recently.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If there is no incision in this procedure, take hold of the lamp or device for illumination with which they press down on your thumb to apply pressure at the end of the range, and cover that area gently as it has been touched upon.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Return that within the chest cavity for ease of breathing and remove moisture from the lung area.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	Thus if there is not an opening in all the causes we have discussed so far, then you must create such an entrance to apply poultice or stop convulsion.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause of swelling in the artery is greasy matter that has entered and inflated it, then administer treatment and removal; perhaps if you do not obey my advice, take a gentle rest with this pillow undernethy (assuming 'underthighs' refers to placing something beneath one's thigh area):
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer it to that limb of which they have extracted in the hourglass,
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	When you think that it is already moistened by the breath of dawn and pause for these drops to become heavy (or morning fogs), delay not its extraction; because when we draw attention to this fact together, it will be removed from us.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	May enter the water where the bladder uses to expel urine, and complete its passage through the narrow neck of the urethra; if by reason there is an obstruction (blockage), it becomes painful – then apply pressure on that spot with a small stone or pebble. Otherwise, take stones made of smooth quartz or jasper according to the length mentioned hereinabove, and place them in the genital area where urine comes out; have the patient lie down atop one such stone placed thereon (genitally), leaping up on it as high as they can.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So that all water is drawn out through the piercing (into the body).
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And if water flows out from the gate-hole you are holding in your hand (made of paper or horn), place one end of it into the aureola and stretch out the other end inside where the fire burns, to evaporate the moisture that comes forth.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And when enough has been taken of the water through such measures until all the water is drained out, and this time allows drawing off the remaining fluid from above using a catheter inserted downwards from below as directed by the extraction stone (presumably for drainage or treatment).
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	When a beast is pulled out of that hole, if it's small and seems to have pain in its belly, administer the pulling out through hands and knives; when it'dict from great size causing distress in the body cavity, then perform extraction by hand and instruments while removing all other causes present therein.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	When pus generated in the artery comes out during extraction, and your care does not comfort it when you pay attention to the artery towards the sunlight, then watch that which is coming out from there closely.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	So then if there is any cause by worms here present, extract that with subtle gestures or movements; perhaps not if no such cause appears, take a thin catheter inserted above and below this way which forms it.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E introduces the delicate part under the armpit according to the quantity that suffers from the humidity; and stimulants are applied there with strong suction, causing continuous movements until all worms emerge out.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	May if you do not obey to my treatment plan, then you will swell and close off the circuit of the catheter inserted with wax as we have discussed; administer these that have already been expelled in their curative properties through distillation processes within the tract.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your effusion is where you pour out the medicines into this vessel, with which it takes shape here.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	E for that one made of silver or lead is struck quickly in which there is a small tool, and placed under the arm.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus it is when one feels pressure in the continuity of this part here, where there seems to be necessary contact.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	If you wish, take the lamp and wrap it around the patient's limb gently, and place oil or honey in the cavity of breathing, or the juice from any herb, or whatever liquids come from these medicines contained within a syringe—and that is where you will hold the lamp—and insert the light source below while expressing out your hand to expel the oil quickly inside the chest'thy cavity so that it feels warmth entering.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	When it is encapsulated in the auricle (ear), then it has already been slightly cut at its focus with a small flame.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	When you handle what causes it in the beard hair without causing excessive friction, for those remedies that involve the beard do not endure such treatment.
Capitol .vii.	Given that this text seems like an amalgamation of medieval medical terminology
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	The phrase "curacio de opulacio de auricella" appears to be Latin, which could translate roughly into English as follows:
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Translation:  
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And when you apply pressure on his forehead, which does not compress the bandage, it is in the major difficulties of difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	In that moment when you pause the urethra of the bladder at the navel and look there:
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	So if you see an obvious swelling on that subtle part of him where it is located, handle it with the appropriate force.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If in the limb where it is located there are sharp and blunt parts, with two bony protrusions that do not provoke injury to the heart; then take care of these points gently.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	So if the purulent discharge is from flesh born in the thigh or leg of him/her, then cut it off gently and strike that part violently until all the meat is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	If the stone is in the entrance of the artery, then insert it gently with a small flame and place that therein; thus treat its position within the artery.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if the artery is affected by water that deprives it of nourishment due to lack of air supply, then constriction occurs; be careful not to harm the nerves of the extremities (fingers and toes).
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	May you apply cold water and dip sponge or cloth in it, placing the cooling item above the wound to use another form of treatment that constricts bleeding flow as mentioned in the text on distillation therapy.
Capitol .viii.	Certainly! Based on your description of the text being similar to Latin with elements
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	In this line, we're dealing with what appears to be an early modern or medieval medical language that incorporates terminology from multiple languages like Latin and possibly regional expressions found in other
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	The phrase translates to: "Of the care needed for those which come into his/her eyes without rain during any dry period." In this line of a medieval medical treatise, it is likely addressing how eye health can be affected by lack of moisture in nature (symbolized here as 'rain'), suggesting that periods devoid of such natural hydr0mation
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	This line translates to: "So that you take care of those which have entered or upon whom it has happened once, and separate these from their roots; place your hand over the locations where they are settled." In this medical context, what seems implied here is a method for treating certain conditions—possibly infections or infestations. The practitioner advises to isolate affected individuals (or parts of them) by separating 'roots' which could symbolize sources like lice eggs attached firm
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	The translation of this line would be: "And if there is a flow of blood that comes downward, then you must carefully burn those affected areas with the small caustic." Here we have an old remedy involving direct action to stop bleeding by applying heat—a simple but effective treatment based on principles possibly understood at the
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The translation is: "And the best caustic treatment involves returning insensible limbs and servitors when any remaining cause of their afflictions remains; after they are cauterized at the focus, those causes shall not return." This medieval medical text suggests that for certain treatments—possibly wounds or ulcers where no discernable external threat is present (indicated by 'insensible limbs') but internal ones ('razitz' possibly meaning harmful substances) may still cause issues. The act of cauterization, commonly used to seal wounds and prevent infection, here implies a
Capitol .ix.	The provided text seems to be from an ancient medical treatise with archa
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	For the phrase "Capitol .ix.," it appears that there may have been some typographical errors or missing context, making direct translation challenging. However, I will attempt to provide an educated
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Translated line by line into English:  
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And excessive moisture is added above and below the eye lids.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	So the operation in them is that you consider, when greatness comes from their tear and appears moisture all over, due to its humidity (or fluid).
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	So when over that crack in the joint for ease of escape and raise it there where one can leave easily, and suspend it hereby above which to avoid disintegration at once.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If you are not dressed with the opening of it so close to its edge (eyes), then you will notice nothing in any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the figure is large, then adjust it with suture; take care that it be healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	If there is little of it (possibly referring to medicinal substance or body fluid), you will not come down with sickness by the fifth day that which remains in it restores and nourishes itself back into health.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the greatness declines at the parts divided by the eyelid' extrinsic layer, you must lift the eyelid and suspend its enormity for an hour or more; another that indicates inception, which should be applied throughout all areas, if the eyelid through inspection is elongated, there shall be no discernible reason.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	When starting (the procedure), wash with saltwater and care for the location where water enters that is healing inside you.
Capitol .x.	Capitol .x.: This line does not contain enough context or content
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	The provided Latin-like phrase translates to: "From the care in the underside of the eyelid." Here is a direct translation into English line by line, with
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	The translation of the provided medieval medical treatise snippet into English is as follows: "Axcirnath (likely referring to a specific treatment or condition) are grays which form in the undersides of the eyelids, mostly affecting children and exacerbate their humors; they cannot be cured by looking at sunlight because those who have them lie curled up.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	When you touch those faces all the time, and on their sleepy faces as well; over their wet brows that are already inflamed, there is an apparent urge to cough; and whenever you notice swelling at these spots, a hundred coughs enter into them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	In the belly hollow where you cut through the colon up until it reaches the arcuate vessels, there are in some months when these arcuate veins burst according to their natural white arch shape.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, take out those clothes which you have wrapped around the patient'thy parts above and roll them between the right and left side where they are spread apart to allow proper dispersion (or separation).
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	Guard yourself such that you do not adjust in the crack, preventing the spine from reaching the joints and ligaments around it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If you do not see your patient's intestine in the crack during examination, then adjust a small instrument within that space to allow the intestine to process; and extract it where we have had them for these reasons - place their bedding undernegy as well in water and agree upon resting places over there. 
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	When heat is applied and rest allowed in that area, thus removing the moisture from there which has been accumulated causing it to become inflamed or swolthy (fissurat).
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Return that which needs healing within it.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If you apply a healing poultice here, then it will cause the wound' extricated body to retreat inside where it can be restored healthily.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi.: (The translation may be difficult due to potential
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Based on your provided scrap of text, which appears in a mix of Latin-like phrasing with some understandable English words
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the patient's eyes, natural hair is adjusted slowly and old-fashionedly by ourselves (implying caregivers), causing illnesses accompanied with frequent tears and washing of eyelids/eye area which acts as a cause for damage to health when touched; cure consists of four methods:
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so that you stop the flow of bile in the liver, and if it converts (becomes red), turn your left hand over it; and if not converted, insert a needle into where the thread from parting has stuck down for a moment at the place on the eyelid above which hairs are located - this is within those same furthseeds. Pull back the filament (thread) to the parts of separation held by your right hand's fingers, and turn it into that very ray (line).
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Return the eye lid fat to its position in the orbital bone within the major tear gland; and remove it from underne extrusion of skin or cloth threads quickly, place hands over the eyes as if holding a feather quill pen.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	Mayhap when the figure corresponds to the quantity of eye elevation, these things are diversified among men; those who have a large amount inscribed in the eyelid for its softening proportion is their custom.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Return the tendon on the lines which you have sown, and begin from the greater tear passage to the lesser one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	If your natural hair split is like the king'thy fatness,
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Return the stitches in the fields within three to four days and take proper care of it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If you wish to stitch the patient'dict, and heal that which expels and contracts, taking away their eye lid for the wound of the patient and its adhesion; perhaps suturing is better E thus attend to these ancient practices.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	Even when it presses on the thighs of him/her, and it is good work without fear in there.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	Here comes another symptom in the head (headache), and it is that their eyelids are moved upwards together with three fingers, arranged as follows according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to have the needle inserted, then take an iron with thread and insert that into the figure'may silk (or wool), placing therein said thread; also prepare another fine thread for the larger tear duct ('lacrimal major'), a thinner one for the smaller ('lacrimal mendre'), adjusting all threads so they are equal in length, and raise your hand to lift both eyesight above where we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And adjust the wound lips of the patient with suture and heal that which is inside them.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	May it be that you heal the wound of your mind or the crack in yourself, but with cloth and appearance as well as soap for cleaning.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Here are the translations for each line of text:
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Ataxiny is secondly in this manner:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and so you change the eyelid and divide the figure as I have described; accordingly, make do with thin canes or subtle sticks whose length corresponds to the duration of the blink and the lower lid' extranodal width relative to the upper jawbone.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already inserted into the extremities of some parts divided, where you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is late, break open your legs with force, and take care that the infirmation stays inside where it can heal.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When secured (or fastened), the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not prickle.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	This is how you make a form of cures using these methods as described hereinabove:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and there is no more length nor latitude in either time or space.
Capitol .xii.	The given text appears to be discussing medical practices related to joint pain or gout
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	When the hair of a wound becomes sharp, it cuts when touched in the body.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are not natural, hard and sharp, it is necessary for you to take hold of an acute needle gently and pause in that delicate spot beneath a subtly raised area soft as silk under which even lions rest quietly; ensure also that all limbs and joint movements remain smooth.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	When it is about the length of a handful (of grains or similar).
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	When you have compressed another subtle thread undernezyme briefly therein, and if you wish to hold those appendages of it hereby mentioned, do so accordingly with your will.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And place your head on the chest so that its work can be declared clear and subtle; for it is a minor operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And insert the needle into the prepared part of the skin and let it pierce through to extract what is naturally discharged from there, within which you remove whatever comes out spontaneously from underneath the skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Return the fur within and place that inside in position, ensuring there are only two or three furs at most; otherwise, do not disturb them furthermore.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Return your hand inside where it naturally rests on the eye socket, from which tears have flowed due to excessive moisture in the eyes (presumably caused by "alcoholic" consumption).
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	May it be that the patient will turn away from their illness and not go to bed without having prepared a place for them where they can rest comfortably when they awaken at night due to fever, into which you have assembled according to what is necessary in this situation.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If it is also short the hair, adjust one of its natural length and raise that; then lift up such to ensure they align with their appropriate spaces as directed by law.
Capitol .xiii.	From this medieval medical text fragment provided, here's an attempt at line-by
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	To treat the condition that is found under the eyelid below (assuming "ehacrar" refers to a specific medical issue or treatment process and considering typical practices of medieval medicine):
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When one blinks and contracts their eye muscles (whether right or left parted), due to weakening of the body's limbs or joint seals from tools like forceps or cauterizing instruments, it is called chalicia; this can be natural or accidental. It occurs because of limb consolidation or separation/disruption caused by these implements, as well as phantoms in their misery (i.dict the patient's torment).
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the reason for performing surgery on him be that you cut through his consolidation and separate his lips, pausing in there between them where they are covered by a cloth of yours, and bind those together once healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	When using the healing tool for these causes that expel putrid matter which have never been able to dwell in their focus, constrict; even if you do so now.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use that which softens arising due to fenugreek in the water where their joints and semen are immersed, or liniments for dipping into this same clear liquid prepared by alchemists (or dyed wool), immerse it herein within the vessel, and heal through this.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The treasure of your care is that you pierce all the channels so nothing solidifies according to how it has formed during digestion.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation that we have described does not require any correction of the shape as it returns to its original form once focused on by heat.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitol .xiiii. (This appears to be a Roman numeral followed by
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	When care is required for the eye drops that are applied on the outer edge of the lid, here's the translation:
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This condition that is present in the eye lid area and which it is named after a certain person (presumably an individual who was first affected or described by this condition), thereof any of its origin can be either natural or otherwise incidental to luck/external factors.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	May it be a wound or an opening (fracture/incision) due to cutting instruments, or for other similar reasons.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The way of the operation is that you take a needle in which makes double thread and keep it on the flesh, making the thread pass through the left tear duct into the right tear duct until it reaches the extremities of the body'se flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Return the flesh to the parts above and below the knee joints (and up towards the thigh), where it meets at the ankle area; there you shall make incisions into the calf muscle.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if it returns to its shape after being covered (presumably with a cloth or similar), then take the lamp and stop there in the divided figure of the eyelid; at that moment, turn on the eyelid, and close those eye sockets quickly before they bleed.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	E their limbs' bones have joint cracks at two angles of the ilium where they come together and when they gather these are what appear as a result from them, which indicates movement or function within those areas.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	This figure is written in Greek letters: this refers to 'land.' (Note that there may be variations due to translating medieval Latin-influenced
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And apply the flesh for as much time that it takes to read this out loud, which is when you blink your eyelids (indicating a pause or interval). This line seems to describe an action where some form of treatment involving pressure on body tissues should be applied just long enough—corresponding roughly to the duration required for one's natural reading rhythm.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Adjust the parts separated and wrap those with wool, apply it carefully as we have discussed about softeners and poultices within which healing takes place (suggesting a method for bandaging or applying topical treatments). This line indicates instructions on how to use cloth—presumably linen due to its commonality in medieval times—to dress wounds, with an emphasis on using materials described as 'softening agents' and poultices that aid the healing process. The reference here is likely towards home remedies or treatments typically available during those periods
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	If you are to cut or sew for a tear or incision (implying the need for precise medical intervention), then make that same type of straight-line division on the skin just undernethy eyelids as has been previously done here (indicating specificity in treatment technique and location). This line is likely instructing how to perform a suture or incision, particularly mentioning its delicate nature due to proximity to sensitive areas such as beneath the upper eyelid skin. The context implies that there
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Separate between these lips just how we have previously described (indicating continuity of care or technique). This line advises applying the knowledge earlier mentioned, presumably concerning gentle treatment methods for a specific area—between the patient
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the discourse on the treatment when acid is discharged or drips out, which occurs during the operation as it's prepared in its form of droplets, etc.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	The artisan knows how long to prepare each item necessary for the patient' extrication so that they can return their figure back to its natural shape, or even more than this required by the operation and instruments used in major preparations.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of attachment between the eyelid (palpebra) or the conjunctiva/cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in men who have it pushed down below the upper jawbone (the ala of the cheek), and is hindered from movement and natural functions thus preventing you to insert beyond the outer edge of the eyelid, raise or extend that part up there or outward.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation: When your eye is washed out, it allows that attachment to be easily returned according to its natural shape and when entirely healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Now apply your medicine in saltwater or distilled water from the fountain where it has been dissolved, and wash with this solution:
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol .xvi.: (The specific meaning of this line is unclear without
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Based on the provided text, which seems to be in a medieval medical language with Latin roots and possibly mixed influences from Italian/Spanish or French as well due to historical interactions between these cultures (such as during
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Accordingly with the unguent (or "ungla" which might refer to some form of medicinal salve or ointment), in two manners: it may be nervous and similar to a delicate cipher, subtle yet impactful; alternatively if not nervous like condensed moisture that appears white when touched with the hand (implying its nature is slippery or easily lost upon contact)—it's quickly absorbed by touching it once but doesn’t remain on the body for long.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both spices do not enter but through the greater tear within, gradually covering the eye and preventing light and motion of sight.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	May the action in his mind be that the malady holds his head atop his chest, and he raises his eyelids with your hand, holding them; take hold of one lash from each eye'suponable (or) double portion under a pinch of pressure, and extend it to the respective sides.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Here comes the translation:
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And when you lift that leg up towards him/her (the patient), do so gently.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And place your incisors into the corner of the eyelid, either under the delicate spine or small forceps, and cut away the skin of the lacrimal naturally so that through this incision there will be no continuous flow of humors.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And some of the veins may be extended or tightened as they say, and remove them from the saddle of the spine where this is their form.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	Ensure that you do not touch the transparent veil and cause it breakage; furthermore, make sure your pupil is pierced through.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Place some salt or quicksilver in the wound and let that enter today; take care to ensure what enters remains so it may heal properly.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the lancet is not sharp and you cannot insert it or have found no suitable place for it here in this unit of length, use a different type of lancing tool specifically designed to treat such an unsharpened lancet; these will heal as they are applied along with recommended treatment within each division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you wish to separate that part (the painful area), then work with the joint of the thigh and place a gentle lion pad under it, according to this manner.
am subtilitat.	am - is/are (interjection for emphasis or contrast in English
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	is/are - are (copula used for being in English)  
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Return your operation over that reason within which it becomes healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The semen of the tear gland, if present in large quantity, is suspended for an hour; and examine that which has been extracted from one part, without further examination to prevent fluid leakage.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	When it is necessary to draw fluid from the tear duct and pain within, do so until healing occurs.
Capitol .xvii.	The given text appears as if it is an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discuss
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Based on your provided lines, which seem to draw upon archaic or pseudo-medical terminology possibly influenced by Latin ("inscizia" could be interpreted as insight and "alguazardenesco" isn'thy clear term but might relate to algaecide if it means something like '
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	It appears there is confusion in the provided text and some archaic or incorrect terms, which makes direct translation challenging without clear contextual understanding of these specific words (as they don't correspond to standard medical vocabulary). However, I can attempt a general interpretation:
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And your finger is in which you insert those or small pincers that he collects from within our joint, according to how it appears here.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	So when your understanding and health are complete with all this flesh, you then fill the wound base layer (eschar) with salt or powdered medicine that looks like grains of rice on top, and place it over where the albumen is held within to ensure secure application against abscess.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If there is any cause of swelling and aggrathy pain that needs to be cauterized with fire or sulfuric treatment, and you fear scalding during the process, then apply heat as needed until that which causes the inflammation yields its effect; continue this therapy within what has been treated in order for it to heal on the adjusted flesh where such swelling occurs.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Indeed, you must ensure that the entire healing of the wound on the hip is done either naturally or accidentally by using iron tools and do not put your hand into any part of these procedures wherein this body member suffers from it.
Capitol .xviii.	Given that this text is not in English but appears to blend elements of Latin with Italian
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	The provided line "Capitol .xviii." does not seem directly translatable as it lacks context and seems like
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	The line appears to be a combination of different linguistic elements which makes it challenging directly translate into English without further context or clarification on the language being used (which seems like an eclectic mix including Latin, Italian, and possibly regional dialects). However, I'll attempt to piece together what might make sense given similar languages:
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	So it is necessary for the feast that you consider if he in whose body there is strength and not elsewhere any other illness, then collect such a one.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	You command the humors to stop their flow in the body and place your hand over those veins, according to your discretion. The volume of this action is either an ounce or two at a time, following these specific steps:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	o such as when cutting in one way according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	Here is the line by line translation:
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	When you have completed it all, then pour into the head bowl or request help so that your action can purify and cleanse away what has been gathered from within.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it is not possible for you to collect all of this in that hour, then apply the poultice made from what seeps out as its pain and leave it on until pains subside and when properly secured by setting with an ointment or salve over time.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And let them rub over him/her once his/her mother'thy condition enters into healing.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is how they are used as forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Capitol .xix.: This line appears incomplete or out of context as it
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	The provided phrase "de reduccio de arizati al nas" translates to English, considering the medieval medical termin
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat arising boils with cautery or acute medicine as soon as the narration is given and it'se not healed, they are no longer in your body but on the surface ulcerated lesions that have matured; remove all moisture within which these reside so a bone can be found underneall.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when you discover bone and at times in decay or ruin, it is thus the form of this structure consists of:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And it is made of sharp cap, and its iron point has been fixed downwards or towards below; and when you lift up such a pinch with your hand using thin lemon stone cuts (as done in this manner):
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	When you place your hand over the area where the bone has been broken down, turn it and move your fingers between the thighs of him/her slowly until you know that this erosion is worn away.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	When there are some purgatives needed, and restore the location due to drying out or ulcerative causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So if the location is solidified and healthy flesh has replaced the sick body part within forty days, without renewal or puncturing of it, and there are no accidents in this place, you know that it heals well.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	If not for repair in the nose's shape, then reduce the crack to its form; and according to this methodology: when you find two sharp objects or acute medicine among what you have found, take them as such following their respective forms.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The external wound of him is forged into a three-pronged fork, and his shield has been significantly worn out within the limb' extruding times like this.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Return the hand over the bone, and that is where its position belongs to it; extend your arm a little of the hueled length, and place in between there with your palm within which part of the body enters through here into the bone altogether feeling ill-humor.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	So then restore the location with stoic purgatives as you take them, which is medicine in their strictness and intensity when taken together for healing.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	So when the flesh and place have become hardened, then the material that has overflown to the parts returns back into the belly; therefore I press upon the abdomen.
Capitol .xx.	Given that "Capitol" in this context is likely not relevant
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	The phrase provided, "de reduccio de la eminence del huel," appears to be a translation from Latin or another Romance
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the humerus stands out and does not harm or diminish through clothing without causing injury; in these cases cover with loosened breeches (or loose garments), leaving space, so that there is room for air circulation after shaving cuts on the chest—apply a poultice made of wax and aloe vera along with seeds or sarcocaulum, followed by placing strengthening liniments over where insect bites have occurred.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The manipulation of the pillows is that they hold it tightly with their lions' fleece and each one folded into four layers; these are what we use for them.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	When applying pressure between them according to the quantity that is needed for it,
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If during crossing (or movement) of the ligament it becomes softened, then a cause for strain arises.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	When applying pressure with the ligament for today'dict and tonight as we have discussed,
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the wound is found to be reduced, then that' extricate well; else iterate the plaster on their pins and tendons within which it should heal.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol .xxi. (Note: "Capitul" could refer to
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	From the depth of the prominence of the choroid layer.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When the covering of the eye is disturbed and it protrudes outward like a grain in your hand, look at its shape with this tool for now; make sure to insert water here carefully so that when you perform surgery on him/her, you introduce the needle into the parting of the eyelid where just started today's procedure and place it according to his arrangement. Then secure both sides of doubled lashes with this tool at their respective positions; make them penetrate each other as desired in accordance with placement arrangements, tightening that motion firmly herewith.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Return (restore) the arrow and pause over the wound imbued with blood in a vaporized wine-and-albumen mixture, allowing it to enter where there is already some fluid leakage.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Return care for the womb with what soothes that which is inside it, wherein resides the fetus (or 'plaga' in this context). Here we understand a medieval practitioner advising to administer something comforting into the uterus
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Apply some guidance unites the entire partition within the cloth drape of the womb adjusted prominence (referring to a tight or swolthy condition), and pierce through the subtle sponge underneath which draws out phlegm from inside the uterus, allowing moisture into albuginea membrane (a protective layer in female anatomy) and withdrawing the womb downwards to its proper position. This medieval text appears to be guiding a practitioner on how to manually aid with excessively tight conditions of pregnancy or miscarriage, potentially referring to manual pessary insertion techniques used for these purposes. The terms may not correspond directly to modern medical terminology but can give an insight into historical gynecolog
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Return strength within that which is healed, indicating the need or benefit of restoring vitality and proper functioning back inside something (potentially
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol XXII: This likely refers to a specific section number in an ancient
De curacio de alconati.	Of cure for the eyes, which suggests that this text is discussing remedies or
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness referred to as 'alconani' (which could imply an eye condition, possibly cataracts given the context of "dissent and not that") is only something resembling water displacement within the womb; it’s essentially a clarification or diagnosis related to ocular health. Here we can deduce from this line in Latin-influenced medieval medical texts, likely referring to cataract removal
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	May the madness of action in it be that you spread the patient'seared and quartered chair covered with clothing, place your head on their own hands at each hand joints where ill health enters from outside, securely drying them to prevent descent (likely referring to retaining warmth), thus eliminating moisture, allowing the malady inside as usual.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not fall into its place (the kidneys), understand that water is involved.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	May it not be prepared yet the descent to health as we have said, then let malady seep between your hands and apply a delicate sponge beneath them under which they will rest on the skin of their panniculus (inside the clothing) above where conjunctivitis continues in the cornea within the crown (within the eye), until it is extracted.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	So when you are taking a bath (donc cupping), it is where the water used contains honey and already boiled water with fennel, which have been mixed together in this basin from where steam rises.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	When it is necessary for healing other causes within that are making him sick, then take care of those things as well.
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol .xxii.: This line appears to be an excerpt or
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	The provided text seems to originate from a medieval medical context, likely written in Middle Latin which often incorporated vocabul0ry and phrasing influenced by Class
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have these spices of water in the division and arrange to pierce them according to health." This sentence suggests that there are different types or levels of "spiced waters," which might refer to medicinal concoctions, categorized by their intended use for specific medical conditions. The directive here is likely aimed at tailoring these remedies (perhaps various forms of infusions) according to a patient'thy health condition
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Therefore keep your mass tight between the thighs on a chair and lift up your belly, as required by strictness." Here, it seems to be giving advice or instructions likely related to maintaining posture for health reasons during treatment—potentially in preparation for receiving therapy. The emphasis is placed on physical positioning (tightening the mass between thighs and lifting up of the bel
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Therefore pause your gaze above the eye of your belly if the water in question is on the right side; or look at your chest's left shoulder-blade space when it’s to the left." This line appears to be providing guidance for patients, likely related to observing where they feel certain fluids (possibly referring again to bodily substances like tears) and directing their attention accordingly. It suggests a diagnostic or therapeutic practice that involves monitoring specific body parts based on symptoms—a technique possibly used by the healers at the time, as part of clinical observation in
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	Therefore place your hand on the right side first if it is in question to be on the left; or vice versa." This line indicates a directive for patients (or perhaps themselves) to alternate which arm they should use when performing an action—this could refer either to self-care routines, like massage techniques aimed at alleviating symptoms of imbalance related to humoral theory. It reflects the practice
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Return the limb' extrême (probably referring to an extremity like arm or leg) away from the crown of the head because it is swollen due to the large vessel in the chest wall, and place your hand over that area holding their hands.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Return (then) into the abdomen's cavity and feel that everything has already come down due to intervention.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And place your pause in the location where water is present; take hold of it with one hand and give another a gentle push to make the water rise upwards thereafter, after which you will suddenly see its source above their head (in their vision), indicating that here lies the malady'dictating.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Return rest for one who is tired; therefore if the water descends, provide that other refreshment before it gets too exhausted.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	So when it is secured and does not descend, then extract the softened part with ease, and rotate that at your will, dissolving a small piece of clear crystal salt in water for that purpose; apply pressure outside to prevent the ruptured organ from leaking by infusing rosemary oil mixed with albumin and egg yolk into the water.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May we who are of our time take a rest on that bread which has been sliced from flour.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	If you do not obey your doctor's advice within the chamber of the bed – for these are men whose joint is hardened by old age – then hold on to their calf muscles, which form this part (the thigh bone):
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And thus pierces at that joint of it there and does not stop until you reach the subtlest place below in the wound, without going beyond this spot to where else one might expect an opening or intervention (to be translated as: And so he penetrates that very joint there, stopping right at its deepest point within the injury itself, never venturing further than necessary).
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And when it is necessary to return (to) the intestine or hernia into its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intest
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And when it is necessary to compliment your work, let there be a preparation made of the warmth room where you rest on your back and hands held tightly together in darkness. Here, all motion must cease.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	In nature'dictum where the water within him flows correctly and does not weaken his head to the fourth or left side of all,
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And if it is in accordance with its disposition enter into the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Return that which is there in the dark and gloomy place to sight again, observe some causes for it, then bring back the sinew within by day VII.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	Whenever you make an application of water in the hour of treatments or shortly afterwards, take care that it is administered properly.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	When you remove water through it, let it go down large and forcefully by looking at it intensely.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If you inject arsenic for osteomyelitis and apply it during the day today, then correct that which yields to this treatment with water.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Absolve the patient'dict sight and place your hand over their face for several days at a time until they are present in this darkness of May (perhaps referring to an illness or condition that worsens during specific times, such as summer).
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	Return its state from that fluid in such great measure and discuss among themselves as to what causes it all this is due.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	When you know that a student may be lacking vision for some reasons, and now you are skilled in the operation,
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has come to us from those of them who are skilled in art, and they say that the focus (or heat) was created at this place where water came out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	May not have seen water in our land that has perfected it, nor water from the free of those ancient ones—it is possible that this new water could be beneficial.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of medicinal spices used for that which is unknown on those, and it can be understood as follows in English:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	Here are the translations line by line:
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol .xxiv. (The ".xxiv." notation likely refers to
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	From meat processing nothing enters the nose." This line suggests that, according to some perspective within this medieval medical treatise or philosophical
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose are born various meats adjusted from which there is no cause for constipation or polyps, these conditions are called 'pollux.' This illness mirrors that of pus commonly seen depicted." Here we have a line where meat processing within nasal passages leads to symptoms reminiscent of common issues like impaction (constipation) and polyp formation. The term "malautia" refers to the condition or sickness, while "pollux" is used as a name for this illness – it's likened metapthyically with pus due perhaps in appearance when observed during an examination. This suggests that medieval physicians linked symptoms seen within nas
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	From the nose comes black and greasy meat—and from it not brown but rather red." This line is likely referring to a condition where there appears discolored or oddly colored mucus, with "black and greasy meat" describing some form of abnormal secretion. The second part contrasts this unusual finding by stating that the supposed 'red'
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in these cases you must clear the lungs and place them under sunlight; then suck out their nasal glands." This directive suggests a remedy involving exposure to light (sun) followed by manual extraction of secretions from the patient's nose. The "lungs," mentioned here, might not refer directly to lung function but could be interpreted as part of respiratory health affected by these conditions. It indicates an ancient practice where physicians believed in purging symptoms through light and sucking out fluids (potentially mucus or other secretions), which is a reflection of the humoral theory prevalent at that time, suggesting imbalance can be treated with specific actions like exposure to different
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	May you hold onto the sanction or incident of corrosion if it occurs; and in case they are malignant, return your hand to where bone has been detached and all cavities have formed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	When his breath is placed in the nose or mouth and air or water.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If your nose is opened and moisture goes into your mouth, you will know that it has already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	May if the humidity does not penetrate further once covered, you will understand that there is no flesh remaining in the feet where it has not reached by absorption.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	So when you encounter any obstruction within the patient'dict path and blood in their menstrual flow, count each intermenstrual period duration along with observing where this mass is located—whether it’s at the navel or elsewhere due to another cause that may be present there. Here are translations for these sentences:
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Here, the text is being translated as follows:
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	When it is in the bone of origin for treatment purposes, insert an iron tube into the nose to keep its place during several days until healing occurs.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	May it be for cure that we extract (use), using what is available (that thing).
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	This is how the tool used by the bleeding maker, in which oils and medicines are extracted:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	E from silver or lead (which is like a small torch), so that it appears as if there's a little candlelight with its handle and body:
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	If you wish, make a closed catheter ready with the instrument maker and its flat surface revealed; place it in front of him/her where hands are held tightly around (it), grasping that which escapes fluids or causes them to escape from within as desired.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	Here are the translations line by line:
Capitol .xxv.	When translating this line from what appears to be an amalgamation of Latin
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	It seems that the text provided is a mixture of modern English and potentially non-standard or pseudo language, possibly imitating Medieval Latin with influences
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	When translated into modern English while attempting to preserve the medieval feel and medical context of your source material: "The nose wanders within the external cavities, which is highly observed on days when it falls under review by Lu."  
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	Through which liquid you have poured into his abdomen for its appearance, and from that all is taken care of by you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Return your hand or burning medicine over the location where it is present.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	May it be too late for his entrance if he is lax, hard, dark-colored and with little feeling; do not touch that iron which has been placed on the skull as a sign of madness—for those who are often affected by this person whom you have marked.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the abscess is caused by a lion' extrusion and not of cold color, when inflammation can occur anywhere in that area, then evacuate the pus and incise there with caution for fear of senile body parts (possibly referring to older or aging tissues), and heal what has been excised using whatever is necessary.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capitol .xxvi. (The specific content of this line cannot be determined
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	When the continuity is broken by dust or appearance (as in this case, perhaps referring to physical obstruction such as dirt between one's nose and lips/lips together with a gaping wound). In English: "The seam between the nose and lips, along with that of the lip itself when there are gaps due to debris or perceived
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	When you discover a break in continuity within these sheets (referring likely to the physical integrity of an object or possibly medical knowledge), there would be little benefit unless it's done with acute awareness, as if for learned individuals ('alcu hombre'). Translation: "If you notice where things have fallen apart here [in this text], only those who understand deeply will find any real use.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Thus when even one of these learned reasons emerges for the breakage herein mentioned earlier (pointing to possible causes or explanations provided in preceding text), consider if it's fresh dirt on your lips, and adjust them accordingly as you sew up that which has been healed. Translation: "Therefore, when even one of these reasons arises for the damage previously discussed herein [within this manuscript], think whether recent soil (dust) is present upon my lips; if so, realign those lips properly and attend carefully to what must be mended.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	If the lips of continuity are already separated and any one is healthy, then cover each divided portion of their tongue to avoid sickness from seeping in.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	May the knotting of the stitch be that you add the thread of continuity or needle with which we have prepared in the abdominal suture, or place the continuous thread around your fingers so that both can know it.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol .xxvii. (Note: Without additional context or a more detailed ex
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	From the extraction of those causes that come into our lips during speech in debates. (This translation attempts to convey an idea related to identifying and discussing reasons or factors as they are expressed through speaking, likely within a philosophical or rhetoric context.)
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Persistent movements in the mouth during speech are like hardened grains of errors; and some have roots within themselves while others become major issues at certain times. (This translation suggests a metaphorical comparison where spoken words, especially mistakes made when speaking or debating ("motz homes"), can be persistent and deeply ingrained—like "hardened" particles that could symbolize core beliefs or miscondictions.)
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Thus convert the lips and spaces for each of those hardened particles from all parts, filling them with ambrosia (divine food) which encapsulates knowledge within it that restrains sickness; place your hand above where wisdom has settled in so much that healing can occur. (This translation reflects a therapeutic practice possibly rooted in the medieval tradition of humoral theory, suggesting ways to metaphorically address and 'heal' mistakes through enlightenthy or purification processes—using symbolism like "ambrosia," which might represent nourishment for both body (physical health) and mind ("knowledge"). It implies an action where a healer intervenes with substances believed to restore balance, contributing significantly toward recovery.)
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii. (As in the previous translation request for this source sentence
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	From the adjustment of flesh within the gums. (This phrase likely refers to some form of dental or periodontal understanding, possibly discussing how issues related to 'flesh'
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great pain descends upon the tightened flesh that I previously touched with my fingers, so that you must suspend it momentarily or press it into place until its natural fit is restored, and then let illness flow out or heal as needed:
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Return your hand over the sore spot for several grains of dust or cauterizing substances, if necessary.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	If that flesh returns, then immediately incise it and cauterize it; there will be no return of the cautery.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol .xxix.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	From reason of teeth is iron needed.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When sharp instruments are applied to the surfaces of the parts divided and formed, as well as between the teeth gums where decay has entered due to corruption, there may be black or yellow pus exudates that are painful.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore when you make a separation between your legs and pause the head at chest level, bite on those teeth where those sharp protrusions appear similar to sand within them, caused by blackness and citrition among other things that have been purified inside.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	So if you have nothing to eat in that portion of the meal, then be; and otherwise, iterate the meal on those portions at other times until they recover as per your wish when tomorrow comes.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	Be aware that teeth require different kinds of forceps and shapes depending on how you prepare for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	For that reason where the razor is used for which teeth are cut and separated from other forms of tooth cutting instruments, these tools must be prepared beforehand as soon as possible.
Capitol .xxx.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any context or language
D’eradicacio de dentz.	The phrase provided, "d'eradicacio di denti," appears to be Italian for "extraction
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	When treating the tooth's pain throughout its entire removal process during all of extractions without any reason that would prolong care after it has been extracted—because within this, there is a substance sublime which serves as an excuse in the course of extracting the tooth. (Note: The sentence structure seems complex and somewhat poetic or metaphorical due to archaic language use; thus, I have tried my best to maintain its original meaning while translating it into contemporary English.)
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	May cover when the thigh is forcibthy torn away to eliminate it that you can certify which one is the painful tooth, whereafter they cause ongoing discomfort within and outside of a healthy tooth; once we have witnessed this through barbers' operations.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	So that you can verify which is the painful tooth and how much of it therein lies any motion or function within its dental socket in which some vertue resides, make sure this part gets dissolved completely from all parts by your teeth'se periodontium (gums), then apply cold presses on these tender points gently until they become less sensitive.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if there is no opening made by the doctor (forēgetat), then take one of those instruments, and apply it quickly throughout all parts to make removal easier for healing purposes at dinner time (ayssim).
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	May if the tooth is dislocated or broken, then bind it tightly with cloth around that part until you can stabilize its delicate under-part so that it won't be displaced during your attempt at correction on that area.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	Return its cleansing with water from the cup or vinegar applied directly, and rinse thoroughly.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If there is a flow of phlegm ascending at any time, do so carefully with movements and if you fail to clear that phlegm, then apply cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and tweezers are those by which the tooth can be extracted with short manipulation from either long bone or thick limb without being doubled when performing these tasks.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	When they are times of large movements within which when you first begin them, they should not be doubled or extended outwards excessively.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xxxi.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise that
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Translation of the Latin-influenced line: "The removal of teeth and detachment of bones from broken jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When the removal of which tooth is causing pain, you must pause over its location at the border for one or two days until that spot becomes softened; and then apply an analgesic or bandage outside those teeth from which it has been assembled on a bird'dictor’s beak or gauze form:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	Those external parts of them are pains stitched with a scalpel or awl.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If you do not obey me in this treatment with these forceps or tenacles, then bend over the bed and remove all flesh from where it has been pierced by that tool which serves as a lever for its use - here is how small its form is.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	E is a large appendage small in size and not prone to breaking apart.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the razor is for an incision (per aquo la razit es foro-getada), be; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments whose forms are as follows: The form of the first instrument is a triangular blade outside its handle (in which there may be some bulkiness).
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second tool is that it's trilaterated and has subtle ends.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now you will assist with this tool which has two levers like this:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments that we prepared by sharpening the teeth of these tools, which was formed into an inch-long piece; this is how they were made.
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	Of the twisted or shortened limb extension, which is any swelling and not for it to be broken:
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And understand that these tools of teeth motion are similar in appearance to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the skilled and subtle artisan understand what means for operation and various illnesses as dictated by his patient; these are diseases that ancient ones did not address or pause to intervene with their proper instruments due to different forms of specialties.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the jawbone or other bones in the mouth are fractured, or if you press on them, then care for it where most convenient using the instruments and forceps that we have mentioned earlier for extracting teeth. Here is how to proceed with this treatment:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And whether there is any large stone gradually, and if it's tightened or swolthy in the mouth so that bones don't escape from where they should be (their natural socket), then restore the location with suitable medicine for this condition;
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a fracture in the bone, then take care of that part which has been broken and from its blackness (perhaps referring to bruising or discoloration), heal it within.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol .xxxii. (The provided text does not contain enough context or
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	When treating teeth, it often becomes apparent how essential they are to overall health and well-be0rthood in addition to their immediate functions for chewing
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent in their natural position—and especially so on the female breast or chest areas where they often tend to be situated; thus consider that if there is no connection whatsoal, nor possibility for bandaging/suturing with thread provided by oneself (since not everyone may have these skills), then it roots this fact. However, even though teeth are attached separately from each other and do not serve the same purpose as bodily organs or limbs; they can still be considered instruments of their own kind—akin to pincers made of iron from India's mines with a sharp edge for cutting (possibly suggesting surgical tools).
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your intellect is at the place where you examine that area for up to several days due to the hardness of the teeth, and it should not be affected by other parts of the teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	If there is an outward expansion of heat in the ligament, then apply that same Indian steel from which this one (the instrument) is made.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Return those lines there in time, and fasten them with good rawhide.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If there is pain where one part has been twisted and the tongue protrudes, then you should limit that within which its sharpness (the pointed friction) is restrained and expanded to prevent the tongue from straying or altering speech.
Capitol .xxxiii.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discuss
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	When dealing with the restoration of severely damaged teeth, whether they belong to gold or silver fillings (which were commonly used historically), it typically involves complex procedures since these types of materials are
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When the teeth are subject to grinding or fracture through percussion and extraction, and when you have treated it with precise medicines (implying dental care), but if your treatment has been inadesistent, then they will not fall into those made of gold or silver fillings; for precious metals like gold do not tarnish over time as lesser materials might. Gold remains unaltered regardless of the passage of days—or years and centuries (metaphorically extended) since it is indestructible, whereas other substances used in dental restoration may deteriorate or lose their properties with age due to corrosion from body fluids like saliva.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And return the thread (or string) to its place within that section from which you began, and hold your hand firmly yet skillfully so it does not become slackened.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	When your cord is where you must hold fast for fear of losing it, take care that this string does not slip from the teeth in which you do not avoid biting.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over the area where it is present, turning those inserted with forceps or spatulas into various locations in the act of intervention, ensuring that they do not cause harm to the tongue' extramandibular teeth.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Return that liquid back into its place, as was done with Roman water.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is torn or crushed, hold that area tightly in such manner for the entire time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is how the teeth and straightness of healthy and diseased incisors are linked together at times like this.
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When returning a stone or applying pressure to any of them at these places, they should be compressed as if we have had and grow stronger/expand (depending on interpretation).
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	Only when skilled craftsmen and wise doctors are involved can such treatment be done effectively.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xxxiv.	The provided text appears to be from an old medical treatise discussing remedies
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Through the ligament in which you insert your tongue and prevent speech (or perhaps restrain someone from speaking by affecting their ability to articulate with their tongue). The text suggests a remedy or treatment method that involves manipulating
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament in which you insert your tongue occasionally or naturally is where a person inherently does not speak (or perhaps has difficulty speaking due to their condition), and an insect that's already been crushed may accidentally cause injury, possibly exacerbating the issue with its involvement. The text appears to describe some form of therapedictive practice involving tongue movement within ligaments where speech is compromised by trauma or a pre-existing medical condition related
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The operation is such that you crush the insect's mouth between your teeth (the existing part in one’dicting tongue movement), raise your own tongue, and insert it into this ligament according to a certain rule or technique—presumably meant for restoring some degree of speech capability. Here, there seems to be an attempt at using natural tools like the body's mouthparts along with direct action on affected tissues as part of treatment in medieval times. This line suggests that by following specific guidelines (latitude), one can possibly improve a patient’s ability to use their tongue despite speech difficulties caused either internally or externally, likely referring back to trauma involving insect bites within the context given.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any tightness or knotting due to the insect's involvement, and it has formed as part of consolidation (perhaps an immune response), then you should apply pressure with one hand within the guidelines established for breaking into that ligament wherein speech impairment occurs. Here there is a direct instruction in medieval medical practice suggesting mechanical manipulation—using hands to press and possibly dissect or break apart any formed knots (nodules) as part of healing from an insect-related injury, again within the framework dictated by ancient physicians' understanding of treatment for speech difficulties related to such trauma.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	Guard against not having a crack in the skin of flesh here, and divide aspheres with cauterization flame ashwani (blood).
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Here is the translation line by line:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	May you cleanse the wound with vinegar that has been boiled three times over it; may if there is blood from the lesion, then use a heated cautery on this place where pus can flow into it and bring to water (i.dict).
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Return that healer for those other causes within which it may be cured.
Capitol .xxxv.	The text you provided seems like an attempt at translating medical terminology from Old or
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	It appears that your input is in Latin, and it pertains to a surgical procedure—specifically the removal (extricatio)
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	The given Latin sentence pertains to some days after lip adhesion (likely referring to tissue repair or healing post-operation), where the tongue is restricted within the mouth due to an appliance placed for treatment purposes; and it's emphasized that this occurs until they can be managed by hand.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The operation in him is that stones are removed from the large intestine before sunrise and consideration of the abscess must be taken into account.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If you see him with a dark or black complexion, hard, and the humors do not rob him of feeling, then do not touch that which is in pain upon his skull.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it declines to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then put the sponge undernethy (the patient), and insert that thinly throughout; if wind enters during your operation, stop for three breaths, so as not to harm the sanction.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Return to your work within which you have been engaged until now, ensuring that it is washed and cleaned well above the beltline region (referring perhaps to an opening or wound), taking care of what has already come in contact with water so far; take care also for any further treatment necessary while they are healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	The provided text seems like an attempt at translating medical knowledge into English from what appears
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	When extracting goosebumps (also known as piloerection or hirsuties) and those that are not in the fingers, along with others like them:
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When gout pain occurs in the toe, those are the swolthy lumps that have been assembled from waxes and oils; these ones harden after drying out and they're called golden nails (likely referring to ingrown toenails or similar conditions); when treating them as you discern whether the abscess is tough, dark in color, with little sensation, do not touch that sharp iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	If it is desired in color and the liver is large, do not touch that with iron for the flow of bile; leave it within so that it may mature, and if you must move it, then break it apart by yourself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If it is of white or bluish hue and its substance is subtle, then that which has entered must be recognized as inscribed within it.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	In performing the operation on him/her (the patient), considering that during your work there has been a pause in applying cautery, or if it is diminished at all; then make an incision down below his waist and place the head of the tool between his thighs pressing against them with their hands. Here also includes taking care to prevent moisture on the instrument used for noble form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	Either it is made of silver or gold, and subtly with cautery.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you realize that it is their tongue and show them the ulceration (apostema), place your fingers over there, holding for an instant until they are numb in that area, then pull as much of it off as you can manage.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another cause that pulls from the tunics (the linen garments worn by medieval people), and according to this reason, apply it with said tool which is its form.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and with forceps are the external parts of it gathered together, so that its orifice in any one of those is sharp and iron-made at the beginning.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	May it be that this tool is not with you now; therefore examine the bone from which this one originates: And whether sharp at either end or partially so, proceed accordingly.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	Put that cut has been made; according to this method of incision, make the incision in the water-frothed humors.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May it be that if there is an outflow of phlegm due to the consumption of honeydew juice from grapes or mint leaves and similar things as causes for restricting the flow of phlegm, then take care of what enters into those causes so that whatever has been healed can maintain its state.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And occasionally other measures are taken for those appendices elsewhere, and they insert them into the mouth of these worms as directed in their examination.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	E you too are a healer by apostasy who was born in the lane of him/herself, whose apoplexy tends to be dark and lightless with little feeling; this person also had locked their own gate (body), breathes strangely without food or water consumption, approaching death within one day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And there was so much gangrene that it had spread halfway between two lesions, and passed through two fissures.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So you fed me with one of their cushions at a time and removed that piece, then carried it away as the large portion, and examined another part I understood from the other two, and bound my mouth shut to prevent air entering through speech; thereafter, I rested on this segment in accordance with where they had set me for treatment.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Return (restore) its cavity back and there is not much blood flow from it;
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	So this is the translation:
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Thus I will lance and cauterize the boil of him/her there, thus removing it by intervention; and I shall walk with them without fear that God'thy hand does not intervene in my actions.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol .xxxvii.: (The text following this reference is not provided; hence
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	From the insight of humors when they are settled in:
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the chest coughs and it is widespdig or elongated, then it's called a perpendicular (likely referring to an abnormal positioning of organs); if in the thickness part roundish and bulging, then they call it bubus.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When healed with the fluid we have discussed in our division, and you do not hinder your treatment, continue to apply pressure on it where necessary; even if directed towards that large round wound which has been added for a long time, its dark or black color suggests blood (sanguine), but is not from this location – then the fear of treating such internal bleeding originates here.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	When you turn that second movement as dictated by the patient's pallor and length, make an incision in the malady area with the tool from which their form is processed, securing it partially within its new state; pull out that portion using one of two instruments detailed here for use at the site of these cuts.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	When not inscribed that which is adjusted upon the patient' extrinsic part but rather what has been set above it; if you do so write about it may be permitted to speak of its properties and effects.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Returning into the wound, use of this fluid which we have applied within its cavity in two thighs, and take care for that which is healed inside it.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient is frightened by his ignorance and fears during cauterization, that use of instruments causes acute water (bleeding), it'dict why you pause at the head where this fluid accumulates. Place your finger on their tongue with the instrument previously mentioned, and moisten said instrument in the distilled water used for cauterization; comforting as they feel when dampened by these liquids—do not let them become thick or subtle therein—and complete so that this takes shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	If you wish, cut the cord and wrap it over the extremity of the rod, immerse the cord in medicine, ensuring that as much enters the cannula to which the cord adheres so well; apply enough healing substance for what is needed from cauterization treatment with wine. Place a layer on top whereby if she dries up and falls off within three to four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If indigestion occurs while you practice medicine, then continue with that treatment and apply cauterization within the vine'dictorium at its entrance into the body cavity; cleanse this area where impurities are present in water, wash it thoroughly, treat externally with oil for embrocation, and insert a poultice to ensure healing.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This healing substance was put in with caution and placed for a long time out of fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Here is the translation line by line:
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the limb into the mouth of the malady while the steam rises to above the tongue, until the uvula becomes obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Here applies to that dry movement within which it is happening now, and watch so you do not perform this treatment on the patient' extrinsic functioning of movements adopted for apotrampage (implying a condition where one has excessive urination), but rather declare this outward manifestation cauterization by him.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	May if you do not have this instrument at present, take a cane and compose an enclosure outside of it for the malady'dictum to be moistened; so that when the mouth of the malady-crystal is wetted, its vapor will not escape.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This healing is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any text for translation in this context,
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	From the removal of thorns and the fluid that has attached itself to the joint, as well as other potential causes.  
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Movements persist in the groin or back of the thighs or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Now that you have extracted what appears to be the cause from above where it has been observed upon sight, place your tongue on the tool at hand for further examination, thus making clear whether it is in the gout (gallstone).
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	When something does not appear and is hidden within the bowels, which makes you vomit the intestines when food has fermented in the stomach; or if indigestion causes an excess of gas from a slice of bread made with rye flour or roasted meat; or phlegm induced by sea sponge moistened with lemon juice, and this strongens quickly to fever (likely referring to dysentery), then once vomiting occurs:
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	May it not be due to those causes that have been mentioned herein, and then use a lead tool in this manner.
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And if it is a thick piece that enters beyond its cavity, the part where you insert into their throat for easier removal.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And lift the patient'thy head upwards in theirs, and ensure that you keep hold of thy touch on thine own throat or backbone, as it is there where he/she lies under his/her care by the doctor himself.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	Even though the patient'dicts their leg into it (the tool), due to his knowledge of the cause and its location, he gently draws out his hand holding the instrument as much as is prepared within him according to what has been readied for extraction herein.
Capitol .xxxix.	Based on the vocabul extrémity of this medieval text in relation with
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	The provided Latin-like phrase translates to English as: "From extraction from the gallbladder." Here is a line by line translation, which assumes that this sentence might be extracted directly without
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	The translation of the medieval medical treatise line provided into English would be: "When medicated blood is taken from what they have said in medicine and does not require assistance, consider that it belongs to the gallbladder within the liver; then you must provide them with a tongue decoy as per their recommendation.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	So if you find a thorn in your foot, extract that small or subtle one carefully.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If it is not possible to extract from that, then take a concave canula and insert into the groin of the malady, placing a heated iron pin at the curve of the canula; allow such quantity (so long as the malignancy remains dead and stays within the groin) until daylight.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Here comes the translation:
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	May it not be forewarned that we have recommended this elixir, thus causing the fever in their abdomen or on their forehead with the same tool used in steam distillation of rue (assafide).
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	When it is necessary (it), then make points upon the surface of the foot with a pointed instrument (pointed cautery).
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And when it is necessary (it), then perform an operation involving the intestine or hernia in which you grasp carbonized materials within an enclosure where there is a fistula; and place your hand underneath this procedure, holding their mouth at the end of the cannula. Bite down on your own teeth to ensure that sub-fumigation (a treatment method possibly involving smoke or heat) has reached its destination in the wound site—the sanguinous discharge indicates successful delivery thereof; after which it is time for action, as this patient will soon experience pain.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If not treated, then repeatedly perform the subfumigation movements, and prevent the humors from entering by abstaining from meat, salty foods, alcohol, and drinking water if necessary; thus making this regimen essential to follow.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the tool with which one takes out pus when seen; it resembles tweezers used sometimes but without any bend in it.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The translated text line by line:
Capitol .xl.	Capitol .xl. (This line appears incomplete or potentially mispla
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	La traducción al inglés podría ser: "In which the speech is divided into parts of their essence." This line seems to be philosophical or abstract and might originate from a text discussing metaphysics, philosophy, or possibly r
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	La traducción al inglés podría ser: "The essences are moved spirits or phantoms, as remembered by each in this book." This line suggests that the author is discussing concepts of soul, spirit, or memory within a philosophical context found across pages (or verses) mentioned. The phrase indicates an exploration into what constitutes personal identity and consciousness through memories
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	La traducción al inglés podría ser: "They differ in their punctures and sections through which they enter, with one being for spirits themselves wherein it enters the body as a form of fluid." Here again we're looking at philosophical or medical texts that could be discussing various means by which something (possibly referring to airbors) is introduced into the human body. The term "humidities" implies bodily fluids, possibly relating to blood and other essential liquids within an ancient understanding of medicine where such terms were used before modern termin
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	La traducción al inglés podría ser: "The second manner is for the locations into which they penetrate, wherein if there's an entrance in the head it differs from that entrance at the back; and a body entry point varies compared to joint entrances. Each one of them belongs to operation." This passage discusses distinct points or ways something (likely bodily substances) enters into different parts of the cosmos, here used metapthyically for human anatomy—head versus back suggests regions with specific functions and implications in treatment methods as 'operations.' Here it is clear that there's a medical discussion about entry points to body cavities (potentially referring to procedures involving airbors), their differences based on location, and the role they play during surgical inter
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	May some tools be provided that are not pierced but rather appropriate for the disease in those areas, where it complements their limbs.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So other such wounds that are torn when crossed and do not mature according to their complement, similar to those at joints where a wound occurs upon contact with the limb'pective area; or if it is from this member itself (i.dict primary), then piercing must be done within its ripening period in another body part – otherwise, should unripe flesh of that main organ have been punctured and lengthened into bite parts thereof, causing ulceration at the mouth end; or any such wound here present itself which has not yet healed up to this point.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	May you know the time of the puncture for the abscess and so it is when it ripens.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	E observe when the pain gives way and fever subsides, apply reduction in speech and heartbeat, sharpening of the head post-abscess, and other signs as well.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	When you know how deep to make an incision in the place where suppuration and discharge from treatment of swelling occur,
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	Through piercing into the length of the flesh or body, if awl points are in the parts of the mass or feet, and at locations where nerves cross (in tendons), and also on all difficult spots to reflect upon; there it is used according to each part.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the suppuration is in the flesh, then we must open its incision until confirmed that digestion has taken place therein; but if you pierce it at this time, the patient's leg and groin are extended, and their lips become hardened, increasing depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	When an ache must be pierced according to the flesh'dictum or due to what is necessary for that part of the body which it craves/needs, then do so accordingly.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	When administering a small incision, and for large or wide incisions cuts according to the size of the wounds.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And among those applied tools where the cecum has been conquered and incised, when pain occurs with bread (suggesting hunger or digestive issues) and it intensifies like what you cause in diarrhea-inducing dropsy, apply them here.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	From those who are seated and have three angles; they sit similarly to the form of a fir tree branch or as if attached with hooks like an anchor'se angles here comes the translation:
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	From them in which it is administered, a round and moon-like medicine, appearing similar (to those).
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	May it not be possible for him who cannot stand with his apes on the surface, that which you pierce shall only penetrate superfdependently or flatly at most.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	When the abscess is large and has collected pus already, do not attempt to extract all of it at once; take out some from that place today, properly treat the abscess within another day with a larger extraction, doing so gradually until completely cleared as per treatment progression.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Mostly if the malady is caused by excessive yellow phlegm or female emissions, or in a young child or an old decrepit person whose animal spirits are moving towards discharge from illness and they will die from the disease, then you perform operations on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	1. Watch this subject with great caution, and place your instrument there where you pierce these lancets, so that you may avoid infections; consider then if the pus of the lancet is scant or a flat piece, thus administer to him whatever remedies olden or contemporary as fit his condition.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If in the abscess it has detached a part of the colon or that area is concave within the circuit, then you should bandage it tightly with linen cloth or waxed fabric as soon as possible after applying pressure pans or rags; and strengthen its position for three days to cure what comes out from inside while those abscesses heal.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If you have an excess flow of phlegm during your operation, then administer cold water and agree in the clothes where it accumulates frequently; apply that over the location of the retained mucus movements.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the flow of blood persists, then ensure that you follow your regimen and care instructions carefully in places mentioned here within our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is wintertime and the location of the ulceration is a place where nerves are stressed, then cover them with crushed parchment or oil poured over as caulk, placing these upon those locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is summer and the locations are carnivorous, then when you pause pulpills at the beginning in water and oil (and perhaps wine), all this enters into your body until the fresh day as we have said before; furthermore, when you treat scabies and remove any residue from them within their treatment to aid healing.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	So it is necessary that the knowledge of cauterization for wounds be universally known, perhaps as I have described in distinguishing between types of wounds to treat them individually at once.
Capitol .xli.	Capitol .xli. (This line appears to be an index or reference
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	In the section where these worms come into play, they enter at the base of the chest (thorax). In English: "Within this part of the text, it
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	Inside the base of the chest (thorax), they find parasitic worms; these are encased in protective layers formed by their own secretions, and it is through these that they move or travel within the host. Here'dictated phrase translates to English as: "Within this section at the base of the chest (thorax), parasitic worms exist; enclosed are capsules made
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from them come eggs containing moisture similar to lemon juice (possibly referring to the wetter nature of some worms' environment or secretions). Here we have additional details about these parasites: they produce certain kinds of 'eggs,' and within
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And from these come eggs that contain moisture similar to pulp (indicating the wet nature of their contents), and they assemble with them - possibly referring both to how worms lay or release such substances as well as where this process takes place: together, likely within another part of a host organism. Here we learn more about these parasites' reproductive habits (laying eggs) that contain moisture similar in
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	In every section without fear of extraction; there is nothing stopping you from carrying them out - meaning the parasites can be removed (likely referring to medical treatment or intervention) with ease, suggesting that they do not damage host tissue significantly during their removal process ("contrariate arceria" implies damaging cutting away), which could signify a less invasive procedure for eliminating these worms. This suggests
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	Here is the line-byse translation: In performing these operations on them with those instruments you are accustomed to use, which they hold onto while ensuring it contains within itself what's necessary for treatment.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If it is about moisture content, then you divide that part into segments according to this manner, by segment each length of the body surface.
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	Here begins in the section of .B., and goes up to the line of .G. Thus, when moisture is evacuated, you scrape off that which contains that moisture, without leaving any trace of its cause therefrom; for traces returned by turns if driven out at all are guided back again into their source.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Here is the translation line by line:
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	If an abscess of fat is present, then proceed with this method as follows:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	am section has a shape of a cross, and cuts are made between the lips of the section, following along that which contains it entirely, and extract your virtue from within that which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	May your cautery cause contrary effects if it does so; then you must report the first thing to me.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	It appears that the text is from an old medical manuscript where various treatments and observations are described using early forms of European languages mixed with Latin terminology:
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	May occur in other openings of the head as well, even those where beards and nail beds come from, but their surface layer is also involved herein.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	When they perform an incision in the lower parts of them, so that disease can be drawn out from those upper regions where it has lodged itself downwardly.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Return care for those who are wet from coming into that of cure;
Capitol .xlii.	The provided medieval medical text is in an archaic form of Latin heavily influenced by other Rom
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	In the context given, where languages such as Italian and French share similarities with classical Latin due to their shared roots from Vulgar Latin (the non-standard form of Latin used in daily
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	The sentence appears to be an attempt at translating a medieval Latin medical text, potentially influenced by Italian or French due to the linguistic similarities:
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Here are the translations line by line:
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	These spices from these stones are motions, some of which are stone-like and contain moisture within them, and those that are harmful for which I have not provided treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	So when you are in good disposition during the treatment (the part where the color of what is manifest becomes similar to the color of the colon and spreads throughout the entire body without being attached to nerves, veins, or arteries), then mark that surface-level area between the upper portion above line G. and below line B., locate all parts within it, extende your fingers outward from under the collarbone as needed (similarly how we have explained in the appendices of this text).
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	It is possible that a vein or nerve has not been pierced through.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	If the spine does not cause gout, adjust your hand inside or quiet down the malady; and if it is not necessary to insert (make incisions), then pause on this day of thin glass wool shards or other powders that flow out from excremental sanctioned sources. If you do make incision(s) into vein or artery, immediately stop your operation for the healing period and allow rest; thus giving time to recover (the inflamed area), soften it, apply poultice externally, and begin its cure.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the sanction has detached.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	So return to your operation within which you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	Inquiry is due about what this body fluid indicates if any cause of the other small swellings (scrofulosis), therefore investigate those and cleanse them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	If it is in the seat of scrofulosis great vein, then do not insert that scrofulus into its own seat.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	When that faithful dog is strong and allows itself to enter where it could harm its own body,
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Now complete and attend to the little creature of wax you have already immersed in Egyptian oil, paying attention to it as well.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	If you decide on that scrofulous person in its entirety, then make sure to adjust the lips and cheeks of the patient just enough so that not even one excess is left unnecessary.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	May it be that you have noticed an excessive swelling due to the greatness of the scrofulus (a type of skin ulcer), and understand its cause, applying as directed.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And when the scrofulous one that contains moisture, penetrates this surface here above where you are preparing it for curing, a deep perforation is made in your hand, and as much of what was put into its base below comes out at once.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And apply an injection of oil and spirits for these purposes, to prevent the body'dictum that is broken from further breakdown.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	When you turn over and wash it again, then take care that the pus generated within is cleaned out so that it can heal.
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol .xliii. (This line does not contain enough context or words for
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	The provided text seems to be a blend of different languages and possibly includes some nonsensical elements, making it challenging to translate directly without additional context. However, I will attempt to interpret the
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	It appears that the text is attempting to discuss some kind of situation or event in this section (seccio), and it suggests that these events are rare enough not even an unspecified person ("alcu") has ever witnessed such occurrences on their land/territory ("nostra terra"). The sentence mixes elements from Italian, Spanish, and possibly another language with Latin
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	The line translates to "This is the scripture of those talks," suggesting that what has been discussed or written previously forms some kind of record ("inscrit
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	The sentence in question seems to be describing how some men may have neglected or avoided the situation at hand (likely related to health, given "epilhot" which could mean bloodletting), resulting in an issue where not all veins and major vessels are present ("juvente") as they should. The statement implies that there is a deficiency because everything isn't currently functioning correctly—it paints the picture of neglect leading to visible problems or complications within their body systems, possibly related to circulation issues if we interpret "majors del malaute" (major vessels) as
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	This passage seems to suggest that there are cases where individuals may experience apoplectic events (seemingly referring to stroke or related issues) and in such situations, they would use measures like applying pressure with a mouth guard ("boca" - likely means 'mouth' here as opposed to the Latin term for skull), nose clamp ('guolayro', which could be interpreted loosely due to language blending but generally refers to nasal spitclamps used in medieval times) or two forceps (“dose aurelhas”). The purpose is when their condition isn'thy located within the neck, they would attempt an intervention on this 'section of
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore when we want to extract the humoral fluid (ascites), that is done by inscribing three or four small circles inside each circle of ascitic effusion, in the space between two such circles as for quantity, so that a section should be within viscera and not cartilage. Herein it's kept away from flesh and sinews (tendons).
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	If the doctor is fearful, then extend one end of the gout-needle for only an inch and open the needle'seum within which it can reach the channel; this may prevent seeds from entering their sanction if there are any causes associated with that.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Lay aside for some time the patient who has been unbidden (or unwillingly).
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	So when the hour arrives in which you pierce the tongue, add licks from your lips on the underside of the beast'supreme (presumably a patient), and that alone acts upon its cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Return with medicine that will relieve the flesh within which it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And as for Albucasis's advice that we have followed herein, it is only about arteries in the malady leg which has already opened by our previous apostates and entered death; the malady itself was torn apart inside of him/her (the patient), allowing breath through those sections where air can enter during some respiration – thus saving them from mortality.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	For the command of water to eliminate the evil contained within what has been taken out (the patient), and it is this very malignity for three days – henceforthy we shall order such cleaning (water therapy) and take care that whatsoever gets consumed inside recovers.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And when you have seen for me by the doctors a couch and mattress in his bedroom, where they place one part of the chest bone thereon (the rib), calling it healing care for him, taking away moisture as if from being crushed with dampness, discovering worms within, then extract them using what was found among those worms - small ones.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore you have admitted that she had not formed a vein or channel, and the wind has entered into her body; treat this within until the focus is healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And if it does not occur on the sword (i.dict here referring to an acute situation or conflict), then return every third day back to their regular duties.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Now it is said that in the section of epididymitis there should be no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol .xliv. (This line appears as an identifier or reference rather
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	In the section discussing absorption where it hurts in the foot and is called a hernia of the groin (or possibly referring to an inguinal or femoral hernia), they appeal/concentrate on the issue within the groin area, which may have slipped into what's known as
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This common inguinal (or possibly referring to a groin) hernia is apoplectic according to the color of the skin and occurs in women' extrinsically here it refers that this type of condition has visible or noticeable external signs, often linked with certain colors.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And there are two forms to consider: whether they occur spontaneously (naturally) or as a result of previous injury/strain (accident). The distinction is important for
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	In the case that it's natural, there isn’t an engineered cure available; nature takes its course without human-
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And for these two types of accidents: one resembles plant-like nodes and the other looks like an abscess associated with a blockage in an artery; there is fear due to their appearance which could indicate potentially serious underlying issues that may require immediate medical attention or surgical intervention. The specific concerns raised here suggest conditions such as varicose veins (which can resemble plants) and potential vascular occlusions, both of which necessitate professional assessment for proper management or treatment options.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is not the case that mere supposition with iron leads to truth in these matters, but rather careful observation and diagnosis; only when there are small indicators or signs can one arrive at accurate conclusions about their medical condition requiring attention from a healthcare
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the sentence to translate: And if you harden it like greasy nodes and not suspend any of its veins, then inquire into that which has come out with them from flesh and bursae; otherwise examine everything about what enters within that which cures internally.
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol .xlv. (The specific meaning of this line is not clear
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Translation from Old Spanish or a medieval context might be challenging due to potential linguistic evolution and lack of standard
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	From the node sections, we have all spices listed in their division/grouping here. (Note: This translation attempts to convey that from a particular section of nodes or pods within medicinal herbs—perhaps referring to plants such as ginger which has rhizomes with
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	Here where I recommend the difference between a node and an outgrowth, since there is doubt about it (Note: This sentence structure seeks to clarify that in this discussion or document clarification will be provided regarding what exactly distinguishes nodes—often used
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	So you declare that an outgrowth is warmth and feverish pain within which boiling excess ceases—and the purgation (likely a medicinal treatment) brings to an end both fever, sharp pains, and heat; concluding with putrefaction stopping further fever. This medieval medical text seems focused on differentiating between types of outgrowths or abnormalities in terms of symptoms like warmth/heat (febre), pain (dolors vehemente) associated typically with an excess condition, and the subsequent effects following a therapeutic intervention such as p
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	Nodes are not warmth nor fever nor sharp pain and contain that lion's head within the womb; this could imply a specific characteristic or medicinal property of certain nodes as described in medieval texts, where they might refer to structures containing heat-producing substances (caliditat) similar to those associated with infl
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	Secondly according to the color of its skin and based on where it is located (ceze or vace), they are considered as second spices/oils; these contain both moisture ('humiditat') with varying colors, which you have divided in your classification—these could be referring elements within plants that were thought to possess distinct qualities. Here the 'color' of a substance is related not only to its appearance but also implied pharmacological properties according to ancient herbal classifications where color and taste played significant roles in their use (secondary spices/oils) along with moisture content which might influence potency or therapeutic action. This snippet underscency the attention medieval practitioners gave to detailed observational medicine, categorizing substances based on various physical attributes
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	So then, when you reach the stage of treatment for this node, which rejects that and inquires about its strength at the crown where it appears as such, insert accordingly what is being sought after according to how it presents itself there.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Here comes the next sentence to translate: Return your hand according to the size of the ulceration, and press outward on the edges (and consider how much has come forward at its base).
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If there is an outflow of moisture, regardless of its color, then you should inspect the skin surface immediately above as previously mentioned in these guidelthy notes.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If you do not remove moisture from the trace of insertion, then it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	If it is shaped like a sickle according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As you have been taught, and upon which you apply it now, ease the entire cob (throat/neck) at once with that tool on which you cut out, protecting your tongue or mouth if possible; remove from there whatever sickness is in the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If it is broken during the operation, such an organ cannot be extracted anymore and must not move further due to repeated attempts; extract it carefully until you reach where in this body (lu) it does not break apart any more.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If from his limb any cause arises, a little or too much, then return according to time.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If at any time you find a small part of the patient'dictor through Roman means, complete with some sharp corrosive powders and tighten them into the mold that is being cauterized; care for this area while also curing what has been treated inside.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If it is great (the pain), then rub your lips on you and heal that which contains the humidity inside.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	May it pulsate towards him or not, whether his pulse flows in the opposite direction or is non-pulsing, then you must locate where there are phlegm and blood congestion that should be sweated out for two to three days within which potions can help purge away impurities from the body (bloodletting), afterward return it into its original position.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol .xlvi. (The provided line does not contain enough context or
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	From the necessary instruments in section and drilling procedures, it seems like you're referring to tools used for a specific task within construction, engineering, manufacturing, or medical fields involving cutting through materials (drilling
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	From those implements used for intruding (which implies tools or instruments designed to penetrate), and from which three kinds exist: the great ones, by whom they move inwardly into place; their smaller counterparts, with whose help they continue that movement of insertion deeper. Here "intrude" likely refers to inserting something like a screw, bolt, or similar hardware deep within an object or material—a common practice across various technical
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the great ones is as follows (presumably describing specifications for larger tools such as large drill bits used
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	And their smaller counterparts have this shape/form; they assist in continuing that deeper insertion or movement. This sentence suggests a relationship between
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	Their form is as follows (presumably describing specifications for the smaller tools). These are likely auxiliary instruments used to aid,
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They're made of iron (or steel), with rounded ends and tapered shanks to fit snugly into the holes or recesses where insertion is required; they ensure that when placed therein, their form complements the space intended for them ("apostemas"). This phrase outlines how these tools are designed ergonomically and functionally—iron hints at durability
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These forms belong to the experience tools (suggesting practical devices or instruments used in a hands-on manner) and they are called handles; one of these I address/refer to as "hand." Here 'handle' is likely referencing something with grip, possibly referring back again to drill bits where having an appropriate handle could
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	So with three spices, some are good for digestion (gran merit), mint and parsley.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of great experience is its shape:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of experience for healing, form of it all:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of experience is little, like water:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	When convened for those appendices, exits, fistulas, and boils to ensure that between these of the bones and other causes there is no gap or space left open.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	So they sew them back together with large needles made of leather or bone/iron and these are the pins for repairing hooves; when done using iron-made pins, even horses get stitched up in this manner.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	These are the black experienced ones who agree that for those there have been openings (fistulas) in their cavities where these things can be reflected upwards to above at which they rise, according to them.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And of three species, some are derived from their longs (bones), and others from the jointed or limbed ones (limbs/organs like arms and legs), according to the quantity of fluid in the abscess cavity and narrowing therein.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of great lead experience:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the patient's movement from lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of small wooden model:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the ointments are made from special things, some as simple, and these only have a bend in them, they consist of three kinds: large, small, and peppercorns.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	From what I can understand based on my knowledge of Latin roots present in this text along with its similarity to Italian, Spanish and French languages, here is a possible translation for the source sentence
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	From these have you observed curves (from those), and from three species/types.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	From what they have (the patient), three curves are present, each of different species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	All that is necessary in this place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a single seed, shape of the foot:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of a single joint movement:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of an ordinary coin, shape of it all:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of an egg large:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of anointed oil, shape of lead:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of an urine drop, form like water:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of large joint has two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The form of anointment has two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of an arch has two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The form of an egg has three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of an arrow has three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of one finger has three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the forms of the knives which cut and scrape joints and sinews, made of three kinds: those from iron, bone, or few other materials.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of the scalpel for use:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of scalpel few:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The external parts of those where the sharp pains occur and where they are not stopped in this manner, but rather painfully extracted from nodes to fear injury to veins or nerves; for these areas heals calmly with a little heat which is necessary because adhesion (the condition related to inflammation).
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are forms of alchemy, and they come in three kinds: large (gran), small (migier), as when carried around.
La forma de magda gran:	La form of grave pain:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of gait in sickness (presumably referring to movement difficulties due to ill health):
Forma de magda pauc:	Shape of slow or restricted walk:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	These are pains from within and of similar appearance as blood, through which they feel pain.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	When you enter through the extraction site and into that corridor where parts are divided and discarded as we proceed with treatment, do so gently while holding on to them.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of cauterization (which are used between the legs where punctures by instruments and diseases occur; these types do not allow us to see wounds), and they come in three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are the forms of those things:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of wind are those by which the flow of blood is separated into three species; great, migrating, and small; these are called "forms" (or types) of breeze.
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	Surely translated line by line into English would be:
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	When these spices of wine vinegar need to be ground and crushed, in order that the outflows from their abscesses may flow quickly when first administered medicine is necessary:
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use those for abrasion throughout the entire body; only in locations like hollows of cushions and thighs (like in scrotums and breeches), and also on breast tissue, belly, and navel areas, similar to carnous joints.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Here are the translations for each line of text:
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some pains are round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol .xlvii. (The original text does not provide further context for this
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	From the care of breasts on women's chests that are assembled together, which seems to be an archaic or poetic way of referring perhaps to a gathering related to breast health or possibly mamm
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some evenings are puffed up the breasts of drowsy men while they wake and eat (complement), thus inflating them further; therefore assembled together on women'thy chests—roundly erect or protruding outward, forming a clear line. This sentence suggests that breast size can fluctuate throughout the day due to factors like eating habits while awake at night and possibly other physiological responses during sleep. The description appears old-fashioned but could relate historically significant beliefs or observations about bodily changes associated with dietary intake, restfulness (sleep), and physical appearance—particularly the way breasts may become
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when you apply it (presumably some remedy or treatment), place that which is applied into the crescent of the moon's cycle according to this manner—from point B inside towards C outside; thereby scraping away all growth, and then filling with powdered medicinal herb. Likewise adjust those lips within your garment (presumably an apron or similar cloth covering), thus curing what is enclosed that becomes healed. This detailed directive appears to be related to a time-bound lunar phase for applying treatments—likely traditional medicine where the moon's phases held significance, and perhaps involves herbal remedies along with specific body adjustment practices as part of healthcare or self-maintenance routines during that period. The mentioning of "the crescent" suggests this could be related to a particular phase in which certain actions should take place for the treatment's efficacy, emphasizing synchronization between natural cycles and healing processes—a practice often found within various traditional medical systems across cultures through history up until modern times where such practices were
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the breastbone bends towards the divisions and is softened with its own warmth as it goes down to the women's breasts, then they are divided into two parts of secretions below these openings, like crescent moon slices within which each contains another part that holds their flesh. Then cleanse the penis between two labia (of a small animal), and remove swelling; administer what has been discussed for stitches and powders as necessary in healing until they are cured.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not complete the inspection of the fluid that seeks to enter due to the restlessness of the spleen and the flow of bile, then pour out the impure body matter from undernethy into corrosive oil and let it soak within what the fluid has ruptured in jaundice, with proper care for that which is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol .xlviii. (The given text does not provide a clear context for
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Based on the fragment provided and considering historical medical texts, it seems like you're referring to an old practice related perhaps to pestling or pinching of lice (from Latin
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	The line in question appears to describe an ancient remedy or procedure involving lice (from Latin: "Aquetz apostemas" meaning perhaps pediculosis). In this context, the text suggests that these parasites have made contact recently and are causing discomfort ("so de las specias"). The treatment mentioned seems to involve tough scales found in scabies
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	The excerpt translates to the following: From those with moisture content; and from others whose scales are embedded in the skin according to this figure (presumably a chart or diagram not provided here): between line G and line B of said illustration, when all that which is within the disease manifests itself. At once remove whatever therein resides—disease entity, perhaps mites associated with scabies—and tomorrow day's examination will reveal if complete removal was achieved using a specific method referred to as 'coto.'
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	Return its stock or wound is anointed with suitable oil until it heals.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	If the application of spices to the nodes and scleroids is necessary, then divide it as we have discussed in the section about the scleroids applied externally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the child is stretched so much that it burns when pressed, then apply in this way what we have at hand as a caustic remedy.
Capitol .xlix.	The provided medieval text appears to be about medical practices related to joint pain or gout as described
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	When you have contracted lice through combing (arcidiazua) or by a bite, here is the translation:
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the arrow is broken and the tendon becomes consolidated over it, which are rubbed constantly causing inflammation and abscess along the artery or vein: when an abscess through a broken arrow affects the tendon above; and as you press on the swelling there, sounds of stridor will be heard.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	That which is through veins appears as a sign of illness in the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Over that which belongs to them for inflammation of the orifice of their anus, cut into the length of the cinder (i.dict refers here possibly to feces), and sever the section with incisions; take out those sections sharply and remove part of the anal opening, revealing it within where covered by garments.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Return and apply pressure to the location where two ligaments are attached at a tendon within which there is dry rot all that'thy art in this place; thus remove thine adhesion (rheumatoid arthritis).
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the source sentence to translate:
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If it is an ulcer of a veinous nature, then take care that you have at your disposal the quantity available for treating such an ulcer at the site where you've touched previously; insert the needle there immediately and make it penetrate—and in doing so, ensure that as soon as one is extracted from another (presumably referring to multiple tools or instruments), tie them together with hemp thread according to what was described earlier regarding the binding of such ulcers.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	May you fear that we extract the thread (possibly referring to suturing or stitching), and if so, then immediately insert it into the head of this first needle lately used for cauterization at any part of the wound. Secure the threads in four places: here on the surface, there undernethyngs/belts (possibly referring to bandages or dressings), and elsewhere around body parts such as shoulders and chest where hands are held by them.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Return the ulcer to its place within you where it has been while there is still moisture in you, and then remove what excess from your navel area as well when that which was inside of you comes out.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return the pressure above it where you have immersed him in vinegar and oil to apply the treatment that he suffers from pain due to stones (gout).
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capital of inflammation which worsens due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	When you have an abscess in the artery and vein, seemingly also an abscess of the nerves when pressed or caused by excessive friction, apparently as well.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	When it is pain in their joints or feet (in Latin "locus"), on the hands of assistants or the ankle, or at any place where there are swolthy joins, then:
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	It is not an abscess in the head of the body, and as for it, both sides are swolthy (thickened), there being none that goes forward towards either direction nor behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Thus, from those who are entombed in joints and cannot move them away, it will soon become a strong bite of iron to contract against the pain.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	May that person who is in the head or forehead below the neck have a hematoma (sprain).
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If there is little swelling, take that tool and separate those parts of the groin (foreparts) and remove them through an incision (cutting).
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is large, then suspend him on chains, and rub that area, and apply oil to secure that object (likely referring to an ingrown toenail or similar concern), and adjust the bandage for healing inside.
Capitol .li.	Capital (possibly referring here as 'capitulo' or chapter
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	From a section of choking where the pain is in the lips and also affects the stomach, indicating severe discomfort likely caused by obstructed airways or related digestive issues that might be interconnected with
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Evening approaches and the homes move towards their bellies as those parts similar to fungi in them swell up—this is due to a subtle essence at its core; also, his lips are conversed with (perhaps indicating disease or inflammation), which makes him appear small. These signs suggest an imbalance within the body that could be linked to symptoms like those of fungal infections where parts swell and change due to internal dysfunction—common themes found throughout much traditional medical literature from various cultures, including medieval Europe.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	Here comes another sentence to translate: And there was seen one of them in his stomach were two parts that seemed as fungi, and they made no difference between those small ones (probably referring to grains or particles).
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And their lips were turned outwards and parted, with moisture running throughout that time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	So I have dissected and fixed them in their places, one for sixteen units and the other for six units.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	If you see the patient's thigh as painful and fearsome, keep your mind firm with iron in thought; perhaps a freshly forged nail is needed now, which we have mentioned herein before; thus allow it to act over two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Here comes another source sentence to translate: "Adjust in the narrowness of the iron pipe; therefore, do not cease hammering large nails into its section until it is dislocated and falls apart by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	May it be that if there is a great size of his limb (possibly referring to an abnormally large body part), then within him may possibly arise fear and sorrow, mostly in the one located inside his stomach.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you separate the membrane of him/her, and properly apply cautery so as not to return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Return that which must be healed within, take care of it so as it may become healthy again.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	Even if you do not suppose that there is a lump of blackish color, with little feeling and movement in the limb it may be cancerous growths (tumors).
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	When recalling time for head elevation (implying that they are discussing how and when to adjust or lift one'thy own head, possibly in the context of treating certain conditions), here is my translation
Capitol .lii.	It appears you have provided a fragmented phrase which seems like it could be related to
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Based on the text fragments, I will provide an educated guess at what these phrases might mean in English and attempt translations line
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The eminence of the navel is painful due to movements causing fissures on its surface; or because of tears in a membrane that lies above these ruptures as they occur elsewhere, or from constriction (perhaps referring to conditions like ascariasis) when it flows downward along veins and arteries according to what has been mentioned herein.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	May it be through the crack of the cisternal and by its thread that the appearance of suppuration is like the body'se skincolor; this swelling hurts as if a lion were causing pain in various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is due to the escape of the intestine (budel), then upon that day we have recounted what has come down from you about your state, which may greatly differ in intensity; and now when this situation occurs, return; for at such time he will be present there with us. And his magnificent display is seen as we introduce him to the bath (banh) vigorously washing away.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If due to moisture (humidity), it is like a lion that does not disappear when you hold your hand over it, nor becomes contracted, nor swolthy.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is for sanction, at this time you appear on black decay descending in these joints.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	May it be for flesh nothing grievous and large in size, then is set according to a certain amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	May it be due to wind movement, then this touch of him is like a lion.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And if you consider the eminence of the navel to be caused by stones or veins, fear and apprehension should arise within you because that is where I taught in the Capitol about cauterization with iron and lancing for treatment.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If the prominency of the navel is due to either the intestine or the sling, then order that it retains its position and remain extended; also assign a guardian for all around the belly button area where you have applied pressure with your hand(s), instructing the abdomen's internal organs (belly) from between their respective limbs above. Furthermore, encompass these within the circuit of the navel located at the spot targeted by the aforementioned touch; encircle this area using the sling or belt across where hernia occurs and secure it with strong straps if necessary (belt). Additionally assign care to areas above where slippage might occur, ensuring everything stays in place.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Here comes the sentence to translate: And if you have touched or assaulted it by means of the inflamed membrane and inserted your fingers into that area, then extract and thrust the intestine towards the divided parts of the abdomen using the ligament; if you've done so through the ligament, remove carefully.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	If you have torn the fabric (likely referring to a bandage or cloth used for treatment), take that one up now; and cut off any excess from it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	May it be contrary to your scalpel or vein, encircle that area, and return to your operation thereafter; take two needles and insert them into those strong fields you have pierced through which a circumcision has been performed (circumcisions of the knees), allowing penetration with these implements – hold it firmly in four parts using the points on the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If you wish to do so, place the needles and insert them into where they pierce the extended flesh and fall through themselves; when it subtly descends and is inserted there, ensure that this liquid which comes out of the wound helps heal the affected area.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the navel's prominence is of fleshlessness or due to moisture in him/her, then you must cover it with bandages and extract dirt and humidity from there; this will remove the swelling present within them, and take care that which covers and consolidates their location.
Capitol .liii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide enough context or content for a
De curacio de cranc.	The phrase "de curacio de cranc" appears nonsensical and seems to
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	Even though we have spoken about the species of rabies and how, in medicine, it is treated—care must be taken so that there are no ulcers; for rabies originates from a lesion (which could imply an injury or sore) where treatment should proceed with caution. It's important to handle such cases delicately as part of the medical care process when dealing with conditions potentially related to rabies, which often arises at sites of wounds that are not properly cared for.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	Here are the translations line by line:
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When it is ancient and severe that you cannot perform on this patient without risking not to cure them or because they have never been treated by us before, nor has anyone come for their treatment here until now.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	When the operation is done as we have discussed, you proceed and lift up the uterus and expel some black bile purgations if there'supreme retraction of pregnancy manifests.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Here the preparation of the abdomen is made for where it will be operated, and prophylactic measures are taken in the area that corresponds to this; throughout all parts concaved under the good curve of the spine so no cause arises from within them.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	May you find opposition in the thick vein or artery within, and when this flow of blood ceases, take care that it remains healed; attend to another treatment as necessary inside where recovery occurs.
Capitol .liv.	The text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De curacio de ydropici.	Given that "Curacio di Ydroci" is not directly understandable as it
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We already have recommendations in the division concerning seafood from water and the essences of each spice for its healing properties as part of our medicine preparation.  
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And that which is cured by iron alone, it is not approached with either tunics of timpani or arsenic medicine, for they are deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	When you have already treated this herbal tympanic remedy and it does not cause discomfort to your medicine, consider that if relief has been achieved in the throat or abdomen and similar ailments of these areas as well, be wary that they are being attended by another healer. For fear remains for what else might require attention therein.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	May if you again open the waist of excess vitality, and this is not another illness but simply water in such abundance that it must be raised by your hands between yours, taking care to express the belly with one hand as directed above while using a pinching motion for the second. Here comes the first source sentence translated into English:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	Suffering from two sharp parts like arrows (extremities), with spurts of pain; yet it may have some brief periods where the condition does not enter into the cavity and can be managed within: in surgery, ensure that this does not penetrate into the hernia' extruded portion and keep it under control.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of humidity is due to illness from the feet, then your team should be on the left side of the navel for three days.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	If the cause of this is due to kidney problems, then your body part should be in its rightful place.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	When your limb is on the chest where you want to speak about the humors for that they do not run excessively towards this place quickly.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Through which I will pierce the cyst inside so that the stone reaches its destination within there, where the water is located.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Return that and insert an instrument of which this is its form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it appears as a subtle silver canula; made of either silver or ivory, to which at the bottom you attach a small probe (thrust), and on their limbs three such probes are used – two from one part and one from another - these tools appear sharp like a quill pen when held in hand as often:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	When the suprapubic veil is in place and you introduce an instrument into it, at that moment they will be expelled from the instrument, so much as can drain out within the hour; but if what comes forth does not leave during this time, then your malady worsens due to its own resolution spirit. Alternatively, apply five presses appropriate for death (likely referring to a form of leech therapy).
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	May eliminate from there according to the amount of its excretion, and as per your indications for the movements of the uterus' position in relation to her menstrual cycle phase and health condition.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear about the abdomen (maula), and pour large quantities of water on it, then bury that which is sick in sand at the tail end, massage it vigorishingly while bathing, expect for a long time under sunlight; thus curing what medicine-drying entails within when healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .lv.	The provided lines contain some understandable concepts despite being written in an archa
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	When the children have not yet perforated their bladders, it relates to pediatric care where such a situation might occur (possibly referring to conditions like vesicoureteral reflux or other issues requiring medical attention). The sentence in
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some of the children are experiencing abdominal pain from their mother's womb, and/al capsule or not has yet ruptured into place. This translates to a situation where there is concern about premature labor signs possibly indicating preterm birth complications such as infection (chorioamnionitis) which may cause the amniotic membranes around an unborn baby's bladder and umbilical cord insertions ("capsule" or "placenta") to rupture early
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, conception occurs with a very slight separation of the seed beneath it as if born underwater. This phrase suggests an early pregnancy where signs might indicate that labor could start soon after or during birth itself (birth may happen in water). The sentence is likely discussing aspects related to obstetrics and possibly home bir
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Pause the slight disturbance with one small hammer blow and apply pressure for three days or so (three weeks). This advice seems to be related to midwifery practices of monitoring a situation carefully before taking action, possibly after an early labor event as described in earlier lines where there might have been concerns about premature rupture. It emphasizes the need for restraint and observation rather than immediate inter
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	When he returns to urinate, it is normal (too much or too little), but return that as well which indicates the balance and flow of bodily fluids must be managed appropriately after an irregular event like premature ru
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If you do not drain the bladder, it is possible that the urine will flow over this area and wet it.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	May that which causes strife in the body be treated with iron as we have said, for up to four days until it is exacerbated.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	When those are not in their proper place and cause distress among them (patients), which is natural birth or trauma that prevents the urinary function at body parts below due to elevation of the uterus above its usual position; it's not a disease from conception, but malady causing retention leading upwards.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	Even in your operation to remove the humoral flow, you may find blood arises here and there; pause where you cut off the humor (blood), and take care of the patient inside while they are healing.
Capitol .lvi.	The provided text seems to be from an old medical treatise with references that are possibly
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	The line from the medieval medical treatise in question seems to describe a condition related to male reproductive health, possibly an issue with semen production or ejaculation as indicated by references to "albater le qual accideys" (the scrotum where this occurs), and problems like corruption ("corropio"), blackness ("negror"), and adherence of the prepuce ("adherencia del prepucii"). Here
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	The line translates to: "These discharges occur in the scrotum, and there is a noticeable accumulation of fat." Here it describes observations related potentially to an abnormal condition or disease affecting the male genital area where fats are unusually deposited.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	The line translates as: "Of this one is malicious, and of others it's not." Here the text appears to be distinguishing between harmful (malicious) conditions present in a
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	The line translates into English as: "Of that one is malignant and not (healthy), which you should gently withdraw from underneath the skin; afterwards place it over there, where a liniment of Egyptian ointment will rest upon for healing. Here we are dealing with something potentially cancerous or harmful ('maligna') that needs to be carefully removed and then covered in an Egyptian-style liniment believed to facilitate recovery ("entro que sia sanat").
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If the gallbladdig is evil and of dark hue, then you must apply caustic substances to its liver and spleen as directed.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the foreskin is present on the head of the penis (circumcision not performed), and one part has been cut off it, while another remains intact because you are holding it during insertion to ensure proper placement; once this cutting process is completed within the act of intercourse, thereafter your care for that incised area ensures no further separation occurs when inserting or removing.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And examining your genitals and urinary meatus for blackness or hardening, as you have already darkened and damaged them which may corrupt further; take linen soaked in ground flaxseed bran and hemp seeds mixed with blood and ash pounded into powder.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	Return that healing now has its caretaker within it; thus ensuring proper recovery and restoration of health as directed by medical practice at this time. (Here, the translator attempts to capture both the
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	And if there is a flow of blood as mentioned hereafter in this manner by doctors: then administer luna-based treatments accordingly. (This suggests that specific medical procedures or therapies, potentially based on moon phases according to medieval beliefs about health and medicine,
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Lunar treatments are at two places: for blood flow (possibly indicating circulatory issues) and when the soil is corrupted. (This translation reflects medieval notions where lunar phases could influence health, particularly in relation to bleeding or possibly poor environmental conditions affecting medicinal practices.)
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	If the head of the vulva is corroded and destroyed at that hour, then insert a lead pipe into its womb to allow for drainage through it; thus enabling outflow from within therein as necessary according to medical intervention timing related to lunar phases. (In this sentence, we see reference not only to the body's internal processes but also an attempt by medieval practitioners at invasive procedures possibly influenced by their understanding of astrology and its supposed impact on health.)
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the region of the foreskin (and this adherence is not caused by dirt but where it attaches itself, and here its circumcision isn't required; when encountering soil or scab formation) then scrape out hardened substance within that area until completely removed. Thus removing what was once attached thereafter from the entirety of this region without further need for surgical removal (in other words: excisional treatment). This reflects medieval procedures where physical intervention, possibly influenced by astrology or humoral theories prevalent at the time, were considered necessary to remedy certain medical conditions.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	If it is difficult to desire those exquisitely, then cover your spine and penis with some cause of the head of verge and foreskin, so that when you subtly press upon them, they are pierced through by their slightness due to manipulation.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return separation between their foreskin and head of hair undernethyel skin layer above that already has become softened in humoral fluid, so as not to stick other medicines on it.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Now apply its healing within that which has been set with styptic (likely referring to some form of treatment or wound care).
Capitol .lvii.	The provided text is challenging due to its archaic language structure; however, I'
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	In the refinement and care of those who undergo circumcision (circumcision).
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuation of diseases: however, when it comes from our operation and willpower, and in children, we must assign them to the better healing way with gentle suction.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	So it is said that ancient ones did not practice circumcision among free men, nor do they use such practices in their laws today, only because we have acquired them through experimentation. This causes most of the craftsmen and barbers to abandon traditional circumcision and hygiene methods using new materials like metal clips and tweezers; instead, they now prefer leather thongs and forceps for pulling out hairs with nails.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	E you have already tried all these methods and found no better clarification with knife or thread in the wound beneath (the groin area), where threads are driven out from under, between the testicles hidden by two tunics, and thrust into place again when pressed down quickly; hence your body is more secure against other ignorance and safe pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	May enter under your knuckle during operation and quickly ruin your work due to iron or rust.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The child'thy bowels are short by nature, and with habitual movements they do not need cleansing; you have seen this yourself.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	May the manufacturing that we make with thread and nails for good health experimentally done by me shows proportional thickness; just as the sharpness when taken away is equivalent to what you take in your daily life—and therefore if you have proportionately two levels of hardness, proceed accordingly at a pace set forth herein. Once made, it gives compression on the foot' extrusion containing all parts thereof which does not make errors throughout its entirety; this we call "the cushion.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first part of the operation is to make sure that most of the patient'dictly understands a little bit (that they have some understanding), and not just leave them feeling as if you were only placing your faith in their limited knowledge for today, but ensuring guidance or instruction tomorrow.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Return that joy throughout all of this work, which is within your capacity for understanding what you receive as knowledge.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Here comes the next sentence to translate: Prepares yourself so that you are not dismayed; and hide your fingers in either side of your chest or lap, so that none may see those very tools with which I am working on them.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the translation of each line:
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of these instruments signifies this way:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	They are some tools outside and others inside that should not be inserted into the keyhole, and their lengths match those of two manual handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	May errors in understanding are far from escape through the internal knot entirely, or a portion of it must be investigated deeply.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	So, when you spread that of your hour on the tip of your finger next to the affected area and insert it according to equal measure.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	If you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract that one and incise it there.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	May if they have passed three days, and when the wart has been inflamed by touch for some time, then apply water so that the wart becomes softened (falls off), clean it gently where you applied it previously, and observe how quickly your remedy acts on it.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	Guard your head of silverware (possibly referring metaphorically or symbolically), for not let it touch this water.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And thus care for that which water heals in the passage of dust particles, with which we have been recommended within their flowing pathways.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If it is inserted into the throat in measure, and you observe from below, then he will not notice it there.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	May he cure that water we have mentioned within which it can be made healthy.
Capitol .lviii.	The provided text appears to be instructions or observations from an old medical treatise regarding symptoms of
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	In the context of a medieval Latin-influenced language with elements reminiscent of Italian, Spanish and French terms related to medicine, the phrase "Curacio
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	The phrase in question appears to be a medical observation from the medieval period related to urinary retention:
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved and remains for some time in a stone already present at the lower part of the bladder, then kidney stones press upon their genitals (their sexual organs).
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Here comes the line to translate: E propone concoctos los pies de aquel sobre sus dos y extiende el vientre desde la parte que está por debajo de sus dos, y malabar estrangula hasta donde puede llegar a él.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Thus when the bladder neck is contracted and expels contents into the lower parts of the body, thus allowing for complete emptying of the urine.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If there is no dissolution of the fluid we have mentioned beforehand, and you find that pain occurs because it has come out through an instrument which they call a syringe (which this one also), then take such as follows: It can be made of silver or subtle lion conqueror; with a slender needle used for aspiration by physicians, delicate like the length of a finger and thumb together. At the top of their head it is thinly dressed.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	When applied to the foot, it spreads over the sole of his shoe and between his legs using oil and woolen cloth strips/bandages:
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Here comes the translation of the source sentence:
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Expose the small part of the sinew and fleece gradually, as urine dissolves the fleece slowly.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Apply external drainage for urine and use a catheter within which, once the bladder and urethral obstructions are relieved, relief will come.
Capitol .lix.	Given that "Capitol" in this context does not provide enough information for
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	When the quality of enema preparation is being discussed, and instruments are mentioned that correspond to this purpose, here's a possible translation:
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When ulcers or suppuration occur in the bladder, or when it is sclerosed therein, and you wish to draw out waters and medicines from that place, then use the instrument with which you intend to clamp. This is how one should proceed:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	sino que in the exterior of it is silent, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that way three troubles arise from one division, happening twice as much.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the meal is relief found, where it calls back and responds in kind to what has been drawn from humidities; when pulled out, more of it comes forth, as happens with sea oil during naval battles at high tide.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you wish to prevent moisture in the bladder, insert the extremity of crab'seat into the moisture, and draw it out towards where that liquid is pushing on the parts below (the urethral opening), then this will remove the moisture from the location of the crab’s seat.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the bladder under which it is constricted, and that very form is.
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And whether it is of silver or side (which could refer to materials like lead/mercury used in medical practices), place the head on as small a feather and immediately introduce cord into them afterward.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Return the bladder to its motion and stop there where moisture wants to crystallize in the bladder; place it between two strong ligatures of double-threaded sinews, so that this moisture can be scalded on the focus.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Return (or apply) pressure to the limb'thy of the patient in the womb.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return your hand over the bladder where the moisture has spread due to entry into it through the censor hole of that patient'n body, and ensure this humidity is contained within.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If there is no bladder present, take a pillow made of parchment and make from that circle; pierce it completely through its thickness; place your faithful servant firmly within those troubles, so they may be disturbed when you decide to move them about; put the same also in urination because as long as you want these moisture contents, keep pausing at what time.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .lx.	In translating this medieval medical text line by line into English while considering its linguistic
De extraccio de peyra.	From rock." (The term 'extracción' means extraction, and in the context of
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already divided the spices and medicine preparation here, and discussed the differences between stone formed in drains (ureters) and stones formed in bladders (urinary system), as well as their symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	In which stone they perform surgery today, part of it remains incomplete.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The original text appears to be a blend of Latin and medieval medical terminology, with some translations required from Italian-influenced or archaic forms:
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And as it is being recounted herein in detail and briefly.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	So say that stone formed mostly in the bladder of children; and from their kidnes urine seems like water due to its subtlety, appears there on that ground – stones flare up it'dinish (pertaining to or located within), continuous dripping pains occur herein, dressed accordingly for intervention.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	It is when hygiene for those children within who have reached four years, and care in the limbs becomes difficult.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	When youth may migrate for this fluid among them all.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	From that from which the stone is larger and where cautery has been applied more gently; if it is little, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	So when treating that, cover the wound with a linen cloth from which extracts have been taken out completely up to where it is inside those bandages; and for this opening of said fissure sometimes forbids itself not allowing any further extraction or inquiry on its own.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation: Return that cautery you prepared between your thighs and their things (presumably clothing or other objects) are now on them, so that the bladder as a whole will gradually descend to its parts again.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Return those parts that are exposed for all of it.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel pain in the space, then immediately place your hand over it on top of there.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	If not now for all eternity the touch of your hands will indicate where the evil humor is in the patient' extrémité gauche (left side), if it infants form a malady or indicates maturation, then insert that into their belly button.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Through the entry of bone that was inside just moments ago, it enters now.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	When that little one goes inside the bladder neck.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Return them on top of that leg there which they've laid out before you in the place where your servant has placed their limb.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press on the bladder with his hand; and another minister should extend their right arm downwards towards the parts below them, while yet another uses their left hand (ma) above it in the part where sectioning is performed.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Return your hand inside of where it has entered, this is how they are formed:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And divide the water between the anus and the genitals here; not in the place of sleep, above from the left hip socket; on top of that stone it is positioned so its section can be wide and easily turned as desired according to what quantity I consider possible with that piece present within the body therein, but without exceeding. For if this bone (probably referring to a pelvis or pubic bone) does not provide for the remaining part of the stone it is necessary;
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	E be aware that there is some part where the joint and edges are located, thus treatment of it would be difficult due to this situation.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	From that fluid it appears as if a lion has grazed upon it and is round, made of the liquor from within its body for purification (cleansing).
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So if it is that which lies between joints and ligaments, adjust in the crack/fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	If there is not an opening made for drainage (forugh-getada), then you must create it over that part which hurts or where the pain intensifies, with a limestone knife held in your hand directly on the skin of that area; do not run away from doing so. Alternatively, if needed immediately, insert delicately and decently an instrument for curvature (precise tool) below the affected extremity'thysk
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot cover it there, then increase the disruption slightly and if you see a flow of blood coming out, cut off that little amount with vinegar (sulfur) already partially dissolved in water.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the stone is present within one of them (the body), then push it into the mouth of the bladder, and apply pressure above it upon this location; also propel a small amount herein (inside); seemingly they are stones from bodily fluids in disguise.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If there is much pain, it is because of ignorance that you insert this large piece into the groin, where one of two causes may be: either it remains or comes from continuous urine distillation, and thus the place cannot fully recover.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	May you administer the removal of it inside while outside during a break or in case there is a fracture and tools are within to extract that out.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the womb of our souls with the juice of aloe and dragon'se blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And when pressure is applied on that cloth dipped in oil and wine (or vinegar), or where it has been scraped with oil and water foam, for the poultice to soften its application.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Return the uterus above the backbone and do not remove it from within three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	When that air escapes, apply water and oil to the area soaked with grease inside where it heals.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	May you apply cauterization to heal and restore the wound, even if it appears raw like when one is in jail (and urine is prohibited therein), then insert or extract that organ into/from the body, which if Roman provokes corruption of both bladder and body putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return clean water with wine and salt; it is contrary to all specialties that which shall be brought for healing within this period of recovery.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	In the hours of complete treatment, where you have both thighs and adjust the applied medicines that are placed on the location.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the stone is small and located in the bladder, it remains there, and urination of urine is prohibited. Otherwise healing this condition requires that a drop reaches to the segment where it has entered; these drops are accused today of causing obstruction—they have already been drained out now, and you need to grasp an iron tool with a point herein:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	From outside the cavity (extramidum), gout is found in a pipe/cannon.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	With proper alignment of bone and ligament attachment, place it there where the thighbone meets the pelvis to ensure that it does not return to its original position in the bladder cavity.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	When metal is inserted into the vein through easeful entry until the needle goes down to that stone,
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	Revolve the cautery in your hand slowly within that small stone, and insert it into where you will make another piercing go through; when the urine is expelled for once.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Return your hand over what is being expelled from the stone of departure down below (the lower part), where it has been broken or cracked open by impacts and its opening allows urine, so that the urethra heals.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this treatment is not available to you for any reason that prevents its use, then apply a finger immediately on the stone (probably referring to a heating stone or similar), and another one under it; these are your hands holding them.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	When applied over that stone in between her joints of painful bones,
E aprop extratz aquela.	Return that outwardly (or bring it outside).
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Return those parts of the ligament and scabbed flesh as they are in soil.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	When it is necessary to lift the leg from below (to examine or treat), you must raise the kneecap to its respective parts above, and return what was previously given back, as we have discussed together.
Capitol .lxi.	Capitol .lxi.: (The translation of this line is not provided due
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Extraction from the stones in women's bodies." This sentence suggests a historical or folkloric practice, possibly referring to an old and
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	 "Stones in women are scarcely produced." In this context, it seems the text is discussing some form of lithiasis—a condition where stones or calculi
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	And if there is a stone among them (referring to the stones mentioned previously), it's difficult for us to treat her and such treatment is forbidden by those who are maddened." Here, the text implies that not only does lithiasis present challenges in its management or cure—presumably due to pain severity, complications, etc.—but also societal superst
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is the woman who dares (to be) strong." This line suggests that a certain type or characteristic exists within some women, perhaps referring to their willpower,
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you cannot find a woman who dares to remove herself (or seek help) when she goes for her doctor's appointment." This indicates an issue where women may feel shame or fear about discussing symptoms with healthcare providers, possibly due to stigma associated with their condition. The mention of "maritiz" could imply that marriage is seen as a factor in this hesitation – perhaps societal
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	And the refined (or well-mannered) ones are those who do not dare to know this art." Here "this art," likely referring back to medical treatment or surgery for conditions like stones in women's bodies ("peyra"), suggests that even educated and seemingly
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of this section (referring to an area concerning stones in women's bodies) extends beyond where the stone itself lies; therefore before taking action there are concerns." This indicates a situation requiring careful consideration or investigation, possibly related to diagnosing and treating lithiasis. The mention "preonda" implies urgency but also uncertainty ("temor"), highlighting that even with immediate need for intervention (action), the decision-making is complicated by factors not fully understood within
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If it is necessary for you to cause vomiting, then take hold of a female medical student'se tool and apply only so much force that there isn't significant bruising or injury done unto her.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you lack it, seek a skilled midwife or woman present in the field of women'thy healthcare services herein provided for division and treatment within this article.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore make that present now and command him to apply all the water you give him, from inquiry of the stone until commensal; which is because if a woman is venerable (old), take her dress down to the waist, lift it up towards her back, where she wants.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	So if you crush that, command it so they insert into that very thing.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If it is not a vein (which might imply an issue with the patient'thy blood vessels), then commands the matroness to thrust her own instrument into the cavity of the sickness and place it upon the bladder, ensuring that her left hand remains still on the bladder. Prepare such beneficial concoction as she has provided (likely a remedy or medicine).
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Thus, if it swells that way, have the person who is gradually worsening towards their bladder'dict from within until they reach at those parts of departure before noon when entering into the region of the hernia.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Return the instrument inserted into that position above the hernia in any part of the patient's body until it is securely anchored and not forced out from undernethy control at once.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	E the section is scant at mealtime; and insert the rod over that section, if you feel pain, adjust it according to the amount by which I know she has been wounded in that place.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	E be aware that stones of the body are bumps: some few and large, like a lion or sharp asspreyroth; long and round, with ridges on them.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	So you understand how many spices are needed for what you indicate about this that will come.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you see an efflux of blood, adjust the glass wool that has been trussed in place and stay there for an hour until it detaches from the skin, then return to your work within which time the swelling will subside.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	When you prepare the instruments used in extracting bone from humans, so that your help can be provided to them during their operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you see a flow of phlegm and know that the expulsion of phlegm is due to insufficient air movement within the lungs (the artery), then rest your powder on the location and start using this loosensing pulvices and expectoration, without further action; hold the pillow in place so as not to remove it, for soon that ailment will disappear.
E aprop cura la plagua.	In this case provide care for the patient (assuming "aprop" means 'provide
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the sharpness of your sickle is diminished through use each day, and it becomes blunt, then you should return to your work within which time the blade must be sharpened again.
Capitol lxii.	Capitol xviii. (Assuming "Lxii" was a
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	The phrase "de seccio sobre ernia acoza" appears to be in Spanish and translates roughly to
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	This phrase describes a hernia as simply an accumulation of moisture in the "whitest part" (possibly referring to fat or abdominal wall) where intestine resides within and thus refers colloquially, often oversimplifying this condition. The term here for 'white' may be metaphorical rather than literal; it might denote something prone to visible changes like swelling when inflammation occurs (i.dictiomatically used as "whiten
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Here are several observations where the pancreas (the organ in question) is located within its capsule and there's another substance already present; it’s not this but rather a protrusion or bulging that we discuss here, which implies inflammation – possibly an acute condition like appendicitis. The description then points out the location of concern: between the fat deposits (the 'whitest parts'), within where another substance—possibly pus in context with potential infection signaled by terms such as "cuyat" and implying urgency ("entro que sia cuyat") – has been mentioned, indicating an acute issue rather than a chronic one.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	This line outlines the process of eliminating this hernia (the inflamed organ or protrusion), which involves draining and expelling substances from within—this could refer to pus, blood clots, etc.—from around the appendix into it ("afunduda aquesta materia"), indicating a potential acute surgical emergency like ruptured appendicitis. It also mentions that some of these fluids may be discharged through percussion (tapping), which is an old diagnostic technique used by doctors to listen for sounds from within the body, often
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This moisture has motions of colors; whether it turns to lemon or cinnamthy red, black dregs, or watery white, that is what we observe here.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	Here comes the first source sentence: When it is about these joints for which this addition of water occurs herein (referring to body parts): if in the clear white cloth we have mentioned before, then inflammation decreases after a long bath with its shape resembling hooves and showing off the genitals; because humidity affects all over.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If the fluid is in the patient's pancreas, then inflammation occurs there and thus the doctor considers it another organ (probably referring to an adjacent structure or space).
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If there is fluid between the navel and the umbilicus (belly button), then touch gently with your fingers on the center of gravity.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	When you wish to gain knowledge of the color of humidity, look at the swelling where it has entered before; and as soon as this appears in the marks left by entry, observe the color of the fluid that was introduced into them.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Thus when we come to treat the patient with iron (likely referring to an intervention involving metal), if it is possible for you to perform phlebotomy (blood removal/drawing) on the humoral excess that I can allow, then cut into the body of the patient.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	When it rests upon its two above any cause or few, and immediately slow the movement of clothes with gentle pressure.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Return the pillow (or support) under the head and divide the neck of the jawbone within its proper limits inside the cervical spine.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	When it is necessary for the second section to be extended distantly from the line that should pass through the groin of the testicles and reach the chest cavity where the white bone (the sacrum) resides, then so shall happen.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Excise that, and observe, and guard yourself so you do not insert it there; your excision is for the parts suspended above or below as much as possible, subtly examining according to what you can manage in the incision site.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Return through small holes in the bladder of water and remove all the water completely.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Here is the line-bydependent translation of the medieval medical treatise:
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	May it happen that during the time of your operation when you have completed the section with suture on the coda (penis) of the male genitalia, return what has proceeded from there and adjust the lips of these organs' opening as needed while taking care like other creatures do, so that they may heal.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	If you have crushed the humerus due to another illness, then take out that bone and care for it with the liquids we mentioned earlier.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	May it be added that if water is accumulated in parts of the body, those are swellings or hernias; thus know well which part has been affected as you have seen elsewhere on this limb; and if it's an operation for you, perform it then.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Remove your sanction and introduce them into the wool soaked in oil or vinegar. Then place another piece of this wet wool that you have submerged in wine and oil, stretched over two belt loops around the waist; pause there beneath folded towels and pillows, binding these together with thread as per this method:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Here is the line by line translation:
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases this hernia is treated artificially with caulters placed under the cut (where it protrudes), where you hold delicate tongs and insert them into that area until you discover within which there lies a white cyst containing water, then proceed as follows:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	e is assembled in Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	When one pierces through that cyst, and it is lit within where all moisture will be evaporated.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Return the ligament or tendon that is cut, and clean it with sharp knives (or cautery), scraping carefully beneath them so as not to damage further; thus perform what you can within your capacity while excising everything on the patient until nothing remains; keep yourself away from where the flame touches.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	You understand that this operation is a safeguard and prevents further spread of the humor flow, better than an incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	May it happen that there is an exacerbation of the disease in the time of cutting or during cauterization, and if so you must treat what appears at your moment for which care has been called upon; this happens according to when said (i.e., within a specific period).
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	May the patient fear if his/her abdomen is painful and sore, so that there'm no need for a second operation due to its horror, then perform an incision as recommended by me; when you have confirmed this with signs we discussed earlier about hernias being bloated.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	When you make an incision in the spleen over any raised lymph node located below the shoulder blade bone (scapula), pierce through the suppurative lesion at that lower part of the body where there is pain, and stop the perforation according to its length.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	When I have made a wide opening for running water throughout.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Return pause over the hollow and place that therein such as it is contained within to make him drink water from it.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Return that which is inside so it may be healed (the patient).
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	If there is contraction of water in that hour when you pierce it: then the pain caused by this isn'thy for fluid but due to air within its cavity, which prevents treatment with water or any tool used for extraction; thus, adjust a small one in the patient's body.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	E understand that water returns and is collected for up to several months or until these accumulations are passed; when they return, it happens according to the manner of medicine as taught by them.
Capitol .lxiii.	Given that "Capitol" (likely refers to page numbering) does not contain
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	The provided text appears to be a fragment of an old medical treatise, possibly in Latin or another medieval language influenced by these tongues. The terminology used seems relevant to the treatment
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	The excerpt seems to suggest concern over the risk of death associated with hernias and emphasizes that viewing (or examining) is key, as it leads one out (escaped or saved). Here's a possible translation:
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	When remembering that operation in those days and with these instruments.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	So say that the effusion occurs in the joints where muscles are attached and is caused by these reasons: either because of acute excess fluid accumulation within the muscles themselves, or due to impact/injury.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	When the nature of ulceration follows the color of the body and does not cause pain in it, and the ulcer itself is severe.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And when it is an apoplectic ulceration wherein its hue is dark and not centered there (on the body),
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And at times the pain is caused by a knot in the joints, or inflammation of those same joints where it has already been remembered, or due to inflammation of the veins themselves.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	May it be useful for inflammation caused by abscess when you apply that on those points, and do not touch them with your hands.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	May that which is felt due to inflammation of a vein not be dispersed by it, and should one require compression for these pains at the top (presumably referring to where pain might radiate or present).
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation:
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Thus if that meat has already hardened within them, then you should extract it and place it inside again.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	If there is an attachment within any cause of cholera or between the intestines (blood vessels), then you must release all that attachment and insert it through a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	May it be that the nativity of flesh in the place behind is what you have inscribed herein and extracted with haste; do so immediately now (or right away).
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Thus when your operation is completed, fill the wool with oil and wine; take care that it receives proper treatment to ensure its healing.
Capitol .lxiv.	Given that "Capitol" is not directly translatable as it seems
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	It appears you're providing a line in Italian or possibly Latin, which might refer to the treatment of an inguinal (groin) hern
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Translation: A cough can create an external wrapping that resembles bladder-like soothing for the testicles, making it difficult to exercise and walk over the hernia area.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	In the treatment of this illness, out of fear for what has already been experienced beforehand is remembered.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, when we discuss what was done previously in that second case which caused us pain here today, it is as follows:
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Return the intestine or hernia into its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from protruding through as you cross it at the point where they have been discovered within the abdomen'thy (assuming 'spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayss
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Then clean out the entire area where we have discussed extracting what is present within your body's temple (interpreted as chest or central cavity). Here, 'excorja' refers to a thorough cleansing process and it likely involves some form of physical exertion given historical context. It may imply purgation through vomiting ('extraccio de arceria'),
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Then keep the double-pointed needle where it is faithful (steady), and thread one end through those parts in which you have pierced with a pin or thorn for drawing out impurities, inserting this other at their backs continuously as they work on them. This suggests an old medical procedure possibly involving lancets ('agulhe'/thorn) used to bleed and draw fluids from the body in order to purify it (perhaps a primitive form of bloodletting).
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Then insert them into the body at intervals of four sections according to their length—presumably referring to specific sites for therapeutic purposes like leeching, where bloodletting is done with leeches ('inscideys' could refer here either directly to medical instruments used in venesection or metaphorically to treatment methods) and withdraw what has been added by the accumulated foul humors (a reference possibly indicating a practice aimed at balancing body fluids, perhaps as part of an old remedy for conditions
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And take care of this minor illness lest it cause diseases in which two humors may overflow their vessels and cannot be cured by anything present here.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	May you suffuse all the vessels with vitamins, thus ensuring that testicles are not extracted from them or their contents drawn out into the vessels; this will prevent malnutrition of these vessels and ensure they remain healthy for optimal functioning in providing nutrients.
Capitol .lxv.	Given that "Capitol" in Latin can refer to an official position or authority (
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Regarding the treatment of intestinal protrusion:
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The appearance of this hernia is due to a section that extends over the abdomen from parts of the womb'dictum within it, through which if tendons are drawn towards those points of rupture in themselfs.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This rupture is either of the chest or due to exacerbation in that person, and you cause these pains by motions: beating, thrusting, coughing, rising from a heavy burden, or feigned illnesses.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The translation of the source sentence line by line into English is as follows:
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	When the patient' extricates through one of its segments (likely referring to movement or process), severe pain occurs suddenly; various symptoms appear on what seems like an apparent spine structure beforehand, and it is due to intestinal distension within the belly womb. Here "seccio del ciphac" might refer to a segment/stage of digestion (since 'cipa' resembles Latin for navel or umbilicus), while "aparent spine structure" could be referring to symptoms that mimic back pain, which in the context may relate to abdominal discomfort.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	In some cases, the intestine is extruded through the opening of the sack (hernia), and this condition is called an enteric prolapse or hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Here are the translations line by line:
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of this illness's spices we fear lest it escape into that place.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: "The manner of that operation is for you to command the malady (disease/sickness) to withdraw the protruded part back into its cavity if you obey your return, and place yourself over the patient' extramas with both cushions raised.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	If it is within your capacity that from that hole which has been opened, some quantity can be extracted or removed.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Return that scalpel to the parts of which has been cut out (the coded white hard piece), ensuring it's done so carefully as they have now discovered those pieces during an incision in their testicles.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And when you insert the tube into this water where they collect semen (testicles), which is between the white whiteness of skin and nowhere else except behind the scrotum, releasing any adherence in that area located at the back of it.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Return the spermatic cord to its cavity in the parts above, and extend it on their left side along with raising it into the section; command the minister (doctor) to spread out the semen thereupon dissolved by the suppository.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	When it concerns the tightness of these joints that have none cause within their white, encased space;
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause within yourself here (referring back to internal issues), then hasten and bring it upstairs quickly into the chest area.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Here comes the translation:
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz deux liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent secondo redondezza, e osta de lu le hou.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	Here's the line-by extralinguistically translated text:
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	May it happen that the drainage of water is delayed, then bind the tail with a bandage and place over where it falls when we have spoken.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	Return care for it with other remedies against pains within that have been healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	CXLVI. (This appears to be a Roman numeral indicating chapter or section number
De hernia ventosa.	In this context, "Capitol .lxvi." likely refers to Chapter
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	This section translates into English as: In this type of torsion or twisted hernia, it has not yet been observed that healing occurs spontaneously without intervention. Here "Capitol .lxvi." again seems to indicate the chapter number where these
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	The first day reported that the hernia was present at which we have recommended treatment; and so you should place those instruments over it for its facilitation as provided by God's grace—and then dry with a clean towel wherein resides the infectious matter, while placing your hands upon. Here "E les primers diysser" translates into English as: The first day reported that there was a hernia at which we have recommended treatment; and so you should place those instruments over it for its facilitation—which is what God's grace provides—and then dry with a clean towel wherein resides the infectious matter, while placing your hands upon.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And when it is necessary for healing according to what we have said herein that such be restored.
Capitol .lxvii.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise with influences of Latin
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	When joint pain occurs in the knees, it is called arthritis or rheumatism according to old texts and traditional understanding within this context that involves multiple languages influenced
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some days the joint pain breaks out with exercise, and spreads to other areas; they worsen their location as a result of physical activity according to these ancient medical texts where language influences are evident across Latin-based languages like Italian, Spanish, French, and Medieval English. Here's an attempted translation:
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	Neither the gallbladder nor its bile has any cause within itself; if it does have a cause, then there is hardly one—and returns at all hours." This line translates from medieval medical jargon into contemporary English and appears to discuss gastrointestinal issues rather than joint pain. Here's an improved translation:
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the time is prolonged for water accumulation within the cistern; and as you extend it therein (the period of standing in which fluid has gathered), causing expansion that widens the opening, thus mollifying the site of penetration and alleviating pain.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	The care of him is with pointed cautery as it has been previously described for him.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Some healings occur by applying iron to its two between your thighs and drying the wound of the protruded appendages on the scrotum according to their quantity for three days.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	Return strength to the white cloth that is placed under where it has been discovered,
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	1. E propria rē porta et praefica ille in locum emergentem cīpācem, sed ante ipsum ventrem.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	Return and adjust the two loci that protrude on the tip of the penis' crest, aligning one with another by means of their stitches.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Exclude the limb' extrusion entirely and not infiltrate or stretch its cystic cavity at all; nor seek other causes that may contribute to your knowledge for treating an intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And in this place, they put it for health betterment.
Capitol .lxviii.	The provided text seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise with archaic language structures
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Here is the translation of "Capitol .lxviii." into English, based on your provided Latin-like phrase:
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Moved gently the scrotum in men up to this time are softened by these movements, and it is observed that they look well.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Now it is necessary for him who cares about the treatment of their patient' extruding gallbladder according to its position in the two bellies, and has mollified that which was on top over their natural navel; adjust your lips with suture as well.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	If you wish, in the meal there is excess of softened bowel that has been cooked three or four times and have sewn up with thread.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Return the incision between the sutures, and with care for caring of other diseases within that it heals and fields become clear.
Capitol .lxix.	In this translation task, it appears that there is an attempt at translating a line from what
De castracio.	The provided text seems like Latin or possibly influenced by the linguistic
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	The text provided seems to be an excerpt from medieval medical literature with elements of Latin and terminology related to the time period's understanding of medicine:
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	Therefore it is said that gout can occur in two ways: through effluvium or by a crack in the limb section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	When it is caused by suction, the way of treatment we must perform is to make a leech in water enter while our own body'se juices are softened and its flesh becomes thin (and hangs).
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Return those into your hand that are solutions and do not appear after touching quickly.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	When pain occurs in the scrotum due to a crack or tearing, you hold and press on the patient' extratesticular region (on their left side).
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Return the hoisting device (likely referring to some form of traction or support mechanism), and inspect each joint within that space where two thighs come together.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Return those pus that you have caused by scraping (to remove them).
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Not over those of the crib (or womb), but under it where there are waters involved, do not place anything; only let that subtle aspect be present which is above the fluids/waters.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This discharge of semen is better than this ailment, for inflammation that draws out the cause from within the male organs because animals desire to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Return care for what is inside that has been healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide enough context or text for translation
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	The phrase "de la cura de hermafrodozia" is in Latin, and it translates to "about
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	The phrase "de la cura de hermafrodozia" in Latin translates to:
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	When certain of that flow from the kidnethy which is in the cunt's region,
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, there is a special one: it is that the ovary of a woman sits above her pelvis just like two small testicles from another man and two little ones in this part together with them.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The cure consists of three kinds: two from men and one kind specific for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	It is that you insert those pills into where escape from the pressure of that place, and take care of those other diseases as well.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second species of men where semen is produced in the area below the testicles, neither cure nor opposition occurs therein.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol .xxi.: (The specific content of this line is missing;
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of aging and flesh prominency due to the causes in women:
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Longingly, it is adjusted for natural causes within which discomfort and pain are regulated; some measures have been magnified in women to such an extent that they resemble the actions of men during sex.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Now cover that which you find extra in your washing, either at your feet or between them and under the skirt/underclothes (uncis).
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	No longer in ignorance, primarily within the belly of reason, so that it does not come to flow out (of the patient' extrication or understanding).
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Return care for that which is sick with diseases within so that it may be cured.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	May raw flesh is the kind of meat that does not occur in a woman's abdomen while it expands; therefore we must examine these parts according to the appearance of a coil (and for this initial call, I refer as "malady of the tail"), so let us observe and heal what needs to be cured within.
Capitol .lxxii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any specific text or context related to a
De curacio de alratica.	It appears you've provided an incomplete phrase in Latin, which roughly translates to "About
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	The given text snippet from a medieval medical treatise suggests concerns about women's health and possibly the conditions of their bodies or reproductive systems:
E es o natural o accidental.	It is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	An accident due to illness has occurred, and it is pain caused by either underdeveloped flesh or subtle cysts.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	E for this ailment is considered due to the regulation of the humors if it appears in youths or elders (boys and old people), then attend thereto; but if not apparent, seek that place where their veins are located or on their head, holding their hands.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	May it be for subtlety under covert means, and suitable as well to the lips' sores; then use your tool (technique) hereby break that which is obstructing them.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	When pressure is applied over the sores on the lips and temporary relief stops when more of these tender areas are pressed upon:
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The woman is above her two, her thighs extended outward so that the subtle instrument can be dismantled and the opposition loosened up.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English: Apply wool and linen dipped in oil over that place, and then massage it until the spot is securely bound together.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the scapula is thick and heavy, then you must insert that lead or juniper berry extract into it.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If it is for meat (perhaps referring to consumption of rich foods), then suspend that one on a dish, and cut into that piece.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	When you administer a broad iron hook for that dirt shall not solidify in place.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And thus for several days or until it is treated with warm soap from him.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Return it back is its other healing within that which has been cured.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Some become sick in the mother's womb at birth and according to this methodology we must address them.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	May there be for asphyxia of the skull head, at which is not to have any pain in a single part due to iron binding within it.
Capitol .lxxiii.	The provided text appears to be in an archaic form of Romance languages such as medieval
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	This sentence seems written in a very old or historical version of Italian, which has some similarities to Latin and medieval Romance languages like French or Spanish but with archaic vocabuls and grammar structures that are no longer used today. Here is an attempt at translating it line by line into modern English:
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: From these openings of veins within which blood flows constantly, when hemorrhoids appear and become painful nodes (probably referring to swollen or inflamed internal tissues), those are evident signs that need attention.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And in this division of those things and their joints, I will direct the ones that receive care towards healing and the others which do not receive any toward removal or destruction (this could be interpreted as distinguishing between what can potentially heal with proper treatment and what may require more drastic measures).
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	So that bruises and thighs when in the belly of the mother and not appear to feeling, there is neither cure nor sword required here.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those upon which sentiments are imposed in the mother'thy wombs, those that have been healed by them.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	When you place the woman in moist clothing and extend her arms outwards (or on drapery if necessary), then mark those areas with needles.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return powder over those parts where fluid flows from one of your ingrained bites, similarly with thirst and appearance for these things.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Return your feet into stockings for an hour, and apply pressure there afterward in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the flow of blood persists, then it will accumulate in a swelling composed of grains and stones and resembles silver or gold pieces.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Return rice made of barley and honey, mix it with water or vinegar, and apply the paste on both sides of him/her.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the sanction is detached, it breaks; and if not, rub on two breaths (or movements), and its scarification upon the breasts.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return the wool and immerse that part made of colanders, or parts from grapes' juice, or honey syrup in wine—it will adhere to the place; take care so it becomes healed within wherein is greased.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May Athys pray for what we have discussed today about the second that I mentioned in speech.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that which is healed within.
Capitol .lxxiv.	The provided text seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise attempting transliteration
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	From the puncture of arterial hemorrhage in the breast (assuming "eyssedura" refers to some form of bleeding, possibly related to tra
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	 Intricate mites bite into the breast, as if with crown and licking mastication of an apesta or ulcerations and abscess formations due to erosions (interpreted from 'apostema lapident' which could suggest a severe breach by insects) along with purulent discharges through fistulas, sores, ragged wounds among other parasitic lesions.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And you have already described these illnesses and the properties of those things belonging to them, as well as their remedies in division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	Here comes the sentence to translate: When you dig out in this tract of apendicitis what is present when doctors are examining it for appendicitis, and if you want to know how they perform their operation on it with a sword.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	And when you consider that the pain from the inflammation in their abdomen is sharp and accompanied by spitting and fever, at times pressing on that sensation will not cause perforations of one's bowels, but rather aid healing within while the acuteness of accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And when you make cushions for the woman on a bed that gives birth support pillows; and recline her onto their backs adjusting their weights just above the lower abdomen section, keeping their hips spread out, placing breath supports under them as needed, holding each one with ropes at intervals.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Here comes the sentence to translate: E apporta la matrona seguidamente e administra o instrumento no qual se aberta el orrificio da mãe, formado pelos quais os fatores surgirão necessários para sua aplicação.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	When you intend to administer this tool onto the patient'se woman's belly and only what from the tool enters her womb shall be permitted, not its head or lead (guiding instrument).
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the tool is greater than that of the mother, then you must pause on its texture with your fingers so that it cannot enter entirely into the maternal material.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	When you pause the instrument that goes down in the patient' extramural bladder, and your hand holds the tool while turning the instrument inside where it is inflamed by mother (likely referring to an abscess).
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When excitement appears and it touches the body (ma) and becomes fierce like a lion or moisture (molh), then cover that area with your hand under which lies the head of bone (cap de lu am spatum).
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	When illness is cured, then you pause in the mud or oil immersed therein where any secretion occurs; and halt bleeding within the section before mother'thy begins to ponder on it.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Pause before the mother and over the clean wool padding submerged in water where they have been boiled:
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Return it shall be healed within two days with this oil that enters where necessary for its cure.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the child has urinated in the bedchamber that you have prepared for their care, do not fear; they will be cured by this water we discussed earlier today.
Capitol .lxxv.	Given that this text is written in an archaic or stylized form of a
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	The provided sentence appears to be constructed with elements that are not entirely clear or standard in English, and it seems there might have been an attempt to mix languages (possibly involving Italian as suggested by the words "matronas" which means nuns/midwives in Spanish) along with a fabricated term. However, I'll do my best to
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	The sentence appears to be a complex mix of phrases that attempt to convey medical procedures related to childbirth and the role of midwives (possibly matrons). Here's an interpretation:
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	So when you press those joints, make sure the patient's belly is compressed so that their embryo can return to its position and give them a second chance at life, free from excess discharges for proper detoxification.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	May that which is not natural and untreatable occur when you become sick on your feet and the head of yourself lies down with its weight upon your head, or it rests atop your chest; if so, turns over onto one's own backbone, becoming similar to their figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	Necessary cause is that she be wise and subtle in all these matters, and guard against error and deceit.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And when showing all of them in those ways, there is an intention for it to signify and stand upon that water.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the joint (or foot) hurts on its own head naturally, it is painful in the woman' extricable part and at times becomes weakened; then that servant comes along who holds their hands, which they have with them, and evaporates the pus mixed with fenugreek seeds and other impurities.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	When the metal instrument is inserted between their private areas and that other one enters into it which contains its moisture, indicating fluid (humidity) within:
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	Preceding pressure is applied to a woman's belly until she delivers the fetus (assuming that "fet" refers to unborn child or baby, and taking into account possible language mixing
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If not delivered naturally, then the woman is considered crucified with wax and seed powder of fennel (ptile).
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquella stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	If your more foot pains are exposed at the table during meals, then make sure that you reduce those little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If she does not obey the interior, then lift her onto a couch and remove the feet from under her, and place the couch over the ground; and the woman must be kept upright to prevent falling due to pressure (concussion).
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If the masses are not drawn out and become flesh again, then you should inquire about those areas where they had been extracted or removed from the body using a linen cloth (drap), ensuring that their size is equal to what was originally present; this indicates fistula formation.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From birth over her feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the belly is on their feet and you push them downwards, then turn the belly small, and warm it up therein; similarly apply pressure with your hand to hold that little body tightly in place gradually increasing its size bit by bit:
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When he is inside the thighs, then you command him to express himself, and make that protrusion fit into its condition; provided if God wills it so.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	If there is no suitable water to administer as recommended, then return the little fetus gradually within while stopping that second naturally occurring pause; at this time, when you have applied treatment with urine (or other substances), it's called a cure or healing.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	If it is prohibited that all the humors have been discharged, then take muscle of elephant and softened gum dissolved in water, beat them thoroughly in the mortar for good percussion, apply lines to the woman's uterus, lower part of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Return that limb in water immersion until you achieve relief for the epicondyle (likely referring to an area near a joint or bursa).
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	Whenever parts of it are softened (perhaps referring to the affected area), apply myrtle mush and place that undernethy therein, keeping an eye on those areas below.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	When you place the patient under fumigation for an hour, their pain will settle on a cushion (or pillow), and hold that stoppage with one hand while extending another to extingdict or spit out from there, after which they lift slightly below the lower part of the abdomen applying gentle compression as per post-treatment requirement.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Eye examination over your humors and blood vessels.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus exits in this manner, you engage your smaller muscles gradually; and position the woman with her back arched over her spine, placing her feet on tiptoe, and those elements resting upon their lie-downs; complete these actions for them.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Here you gently press on the patient's abdomen little by little, and apply pressure where their feet are numbed with haste before they enter into action in the party room section of treatment time frames when necessary:
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the fetus is not out yet, then lift up their feet and move them vigorously so that they come into position gradually inside until the fetus enters its parts (i.e., reaches different body regions).
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	1. Then insert and gently press the finger into where the belly has been made through, commanding the woman to express herself within that hole.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Evening time languidly hangs among its most (or) deep within itself.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	When it is in reduction of her body, if you cannot reduce that yourself, then lift the woman and carry her to where she can be reduced.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If it is not possible to move the patient, then place them on their lie (bed), and forcefully squeeze their thighs together with violence until they feel pain; at this point administer ligatures made of mucilage as recommended by medicine.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If childbirth has occurred, then make that tool hover over the pubic bone, and study how to reduce swelling, taking into account such movements of the body as its second natural form, gently stimulate the woman'thy interior so she can return through her own opening.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Ease of breath over expanded lungs and chest is at their waist'seat (or center).
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	When the matron holds her hand over the fetus and gradually turns it slowly, this makes things easier for them.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	When it becomes necessary for him/her to lie down on the bed, and at that time rests upon the chest where they have applied oil and poultices from above (above referring likely to topical applications).
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Exitus fetus prepared above side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the patient suffers from this illness of menstruation as described hereinabove, and you notice her second phase entering your touchpoint (vulva), then insert into it with your finger to expel moisture (menstrual blood).
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	If the fetus is hanging over the face and neck of him/her, then you insert that part into the umbilicus to prevent it from being retained or delayed.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Here is the translation line by line:
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of twins or fetuses from many.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You understand that joints move naturally without pain, and sometimes there are a few twitches or spasms at most, which may be strange occurrences due to illness, but they do not affect life itself.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And when those things are multiplied and secondary ones appear through ciphers (interpreted as some form of visual or symbolic representation), separate these entrails within the belly button of each one, occasionally for natural expulsion in childbirth with delivery assistance required by us at times.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	If the childbirth is difficult for them and they come to where we have previously discussed about non-natural figures, then take care of those pains as we have described.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	If the maid is subtle and infuses water that makes it easier and more refined, and slows time down, so too does her skill according to how she has prepared herself for healing arts bringing salvation.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of what formed within the womb and was aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: At all times when such knowledge of women' extricates a resemblance to water for some reason or another, thus it is directed towards that which extracts (or seeks) outwardly.
Capitol .lxxvi.	The provided lines appear to describe medieval medical practices for treating joint pain (possibly due to
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Translation of this line from a potential Latin-based or historical context into English would be: "When the fet
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead child we have spoken of in medical division and it has not been taken away, then proceed with using a bedcloth as protection if the woman is healthy enough that she isn't affected by accidents upon which fear might be lost over her.  
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	When the woman is leaning on her back over her two shoulders and her hips are inclined upward with her thighs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister takes that of her parts or bound within the limits, so that not a single drop can escape from the womb for delivery.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Return your touch (or apply) moisture to the mother's mouth for possible thickness and mucus from hops, fennel, and lentils; these are what hold her hands together.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Here the midwife applies ointment to her hands with these oils and mucilage (a jelly-like substance), places it on her abdomen as needed, and secures it in place where the cuts remain after childbirth.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Here come locations suitable in water: therefore consider if the fetus is prepared to be placed on its head (or back), and ensure that you hold it with your hands holding its hair or chest (or collarbone), another hand under legs, a servant supporting shoulders or ears, or at any of these patient's designated areas such as the hips, waistbands, throat/palate, neck bone (cervical spine), hypochondrium.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If it is over the patient' extricable parts—that being their feet or back in lying position (implied by "mieg" which could mean sleeping pose), then they will be painful there as well within these positions, namely at his/her knees and lower back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	When the tongue has its mouth closed and bends at that place where it is between the knees on this side of the body, apply pressure with ease so that the joint stays in those places we have identified for them to prevent dislocation from occurrdicting (arthritis).
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Return your pace and place another spoon if necessary, to attach it around the patient's mouth, ensuring that it is not extended beyond their chest alone justly so far.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	When gout is present throughout the body, it should be treated as quickly as possible like a toothache (referring herein perhaps not directly but metapthyically).
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	So if the body part is dislocated (forced out of place), then bind it securely where it has been pushed, and so that the entire body part returns to its proper location.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the other is an abscess near it and cannot be reduced by pressing on that area because a cloth or bandage covers it; then remove the covering so that everything outside can come out, and incise what remains either at the site of the swelling or in the groin.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And there is a cover that you make in the other place (presumably above or around) and on both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the fetus is large, or if it's contracted in labor, or its water-filled cavity is adjusted at the top, then cover that which inserts between the dilation and opening of the cervix to extract the fluid, using an instrument known as "alundat," whose form will be derived from those used here.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Here seems to be great swelling by nature: and when it enters the body (through wounds or abrasions), causing inflammation, take out that which is already inside with tweezers from between the bones.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the head is sick and compressed by the sternum, then its moisture that which exists in the chest has been expelled.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	May it not become complicated, nor require medication; therefore proceed with the treatment as far as you can manage for your own good.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If there is an outflow of fluid from the abdomen or it drips downward, then you must pierce that which absorbs this moisture within.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If it is on your feet, then the attraction of you to them (i.m., drawing oneself towards) will be light and in their direction toward the mother's mouth shall also be light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If the abdomen and chest are pressed upon you, then remove that dress which covers your body, tear it open so that water can flow through those places where it currently is held back.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	May it be that if the other members are placed and turned around their head; may it also happen when the mouth of the midwife is opened wide open therein—place her hand inside near the forehead; seal up this entrance with a finger or two, and draw them in here together.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	If the mother'thy mouth is constricted by an apothecary wax that hurts in her throat, let it not tighten further upon her; from here onwards take measures to manage causes of moist and fatty effusions.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Here applies plasters; and follow the patient in waters that moisten and soften.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If it is on his chest, then if possible, use a sharp instrument and administer the wine we have mentioned for him to drink.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If it is not possible, then be inscribed in stones and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	When no cause from the second (or secondary) has been discovered yet.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	When you have completed your treatment, then administer what we have discussed for the curative measures of the puncture wounds caused by the mother' extrusion (possibly referring to a hernia or related condition).
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If you have excessive phlegm flowing away into precise and clear waters, then administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And there was seen in her abdomen another woman who had died and whom they placed upon that other bed already taken for use by someone else; here is also laid the body of the dead one she bore.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	Occurred an abscess on my patient's navel for a long time; and it expanded as if there was a swelling inside me, causing pain in the limbs.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And it has been applied for healing him/her, and medicine (has) been administered to them long ago, but the child is not yet cured.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	And thus you rest on them for some strong binding applications and an open eye of lead to the abdomen each day, and another such application daily as well: it has been too marvelous when there is not even a bone in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And so you consider that they are bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	So put on the leather gown, and extract teeth from under it where they are located in the groins' arrangements; already extracted for a long time, now correct with a small bracelet.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Not for being strange, but because of what is known and how one can help with it, that'dictor will provide care through his skill.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	From the tools necessary for removing the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of movement in which she is lifted upwards:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is how one endures freeing oneself in which two forces are exerted on the extremities of both feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	Translation line by line into English:
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	These two additions are made into the mouth of the mother so that they can be used when you turn these provided instructions around.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Form a similar appearance of that subtle and light putrefaction here below:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Such pain is of bone or joint according to the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	Even in the limb's extreme part two additional times are added together, and the length of these additions amounts to a palm, while their duration is two days.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	When you wish for these hollows to be filled with water, then place the woman on a bed where her feet hang downwards and fill this space that is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The method by which they performed it in old times:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The form of force by which he pushes his body:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of friendship in which it is concerned with taking care of the head'dictated by this phrase can be interpreted as a type or manner of camaraderie where there is an emphasis on car
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	Assembled with forceps at the extremity where it is touched and held on for some time or even repeatedly; occasionally there are long pulls, as when using these instruments to hold onto a small object that was already grasped tightly by them beforehand—this describes how one should properly handle forceps in medical procedures.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of alleviation few:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of an eye has a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Shape of anointment has needles:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps by which his head is held and contained within it:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The form of scab has two extremities at which the head detaches:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two leather pieces:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are used and when they multiply the spices of that essence and apply them as required according to their quantity, place it on his wound and put some men for its amount.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not perform any actions with those instruments unless it is absolutely necessary.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the second extraction.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second daughter is retained during childbirth, you must command the midwife to hold back her labor, and apply that specific pressure exerted by your hand on her mouth and nipples; if so she will give birth naturally without complication.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	If not, then take a wave and pierce through the covering at that spot until you find burning herb whose mouth is consumed by heat, apply with calamus and rue and anise and camphor and clove oil (and cassia bark), as directed.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water within the wave, and it rests on the flame.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Return breath via the funnel of the barrel to the cavity of the mouth, and insert that into where it goes down inside the mouth's hollow.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	Return that joint inflammation as it is today and heal with haste the secondary issue which appears out of place.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	May if you apply this treatment and it does not cause illness, then command the maid to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or high-grade alcoholic solution, as recommended by us, and insert that into his/her navel; after finding such a substance, place your hands above so that they do not draw attention.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	From above where pain is permitted in both sides easily accessible areas of the body (literally "above where it'se allowed on either side at easy access"). This sentence implies that there are certain parts of the body, likely near or
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	Adjusts its quantity according to attachment and avoidance (literally "it adjusts the amount of contact depending on attachment and withdrawal"). This sentence seems to suggest that a person's or entity’ extrinsic behavior in forming attachments is modulated by their comfort levels with closeness ("attachment") versus keeping
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the mother's mouth is constricted (literally "if the mother's mouth is tightened"), we already have recommended treatments for both starvation and medicine derived from plants (literally, there are recommendations ready-made for addressing hunger due to lack of food as well as pharmacological solutions sourced from herbs). This sentence indicates that if the mother's
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	Should it not be addressed that which has been recommended, keep in mind only what is directly related to the mother's mouth—if there are issues with this area (literally "should we ignore those recommendations provided?"), pay attention primarily to concerns about her/his condition around maternal oral care; however if they appear more than once and continue over several abstract considerations, cover that specifically by sealing it tightly along with four remedies—these will resolve the situation for a few days while removing dissatisfaction (literally "if these matters are repeatedly discussed without concrete resolutions"), then apply this combined treatment briefly to alleviate discomfort and gradually reestablish contentment. This statement implies that recurrent concerns or abstract debates about unresolved problems, particularly those related to maternal care around the mouth of a woman (possibly referring metaphorically in some aspects), should be directly addressed with specific interventions rather than getting lost in endless discussions; such direct actions are expected not only to provide immediate relief but also contribute toward achishifting back towards harmony and satisfaction. This translation maintains the essence of medieval medical philosophy, where holistic care was often tied closely together—medical remedies were intertwined with moral or spiritual guidance as well (indicated by
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When you have to take it upwards, the humoral imbalance is elevated above the head and stomach; hence medications are administered under fumigation as needed.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Mayers of antiques are subjected under smoke and dried fruits.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of this tool by which a woman is subjected to retain her menstrual blood and the second daughter, should be like so...
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It is caused by iron or lead.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	When the subtle part is stopped under the belly and the large part over the focus (probably referring to body regions), and when the fumes are also stopped beneath the chest, in the region of the breasts/bosom.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	E where that tongue is placed inside which has been ingested under fumed or vaporous conditions, do so repeatedly itself.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of healing for an unharmed child' extrication from illness is not required (literally "there is no need to remove through treatment"). This
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	 Children's children are not harmed in such a way that they would need delicate and gentle handling (literally "children do not suffer harm to their bottoms which requires careful and tender treatment"). Here 'Motz enfantz naysso...' can be interpreted as suggesting no significant medical intervention is needed, hence the phrase focuses on
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	 Thus the mother should pierce her own child's sensitive area if necessary (literally "then have it done by its own mother"), but be careful not to touch their wound with a sharp object like an agut or spatula, indicating that even self-treatment requires caution. Here 'Adonc cove...perfora am le sieu dit' means the one responsible for treatment should perform it (literally "then cover up what is his own"), and in
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	 Allow that cloth saturated with wine (likely an herbal poultice) over the affected area, and provide appropriate care within it as directed ('aprop curt' can be understood to mean 'suitably treat'). Here instructions are likely for home remedies or simple medical application using available resources: a warm compress soaked in vineg
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	 If there is concern that it may be inflamed (literally "if he suspects swelling"), pause in the torture for a few days using an inserted catheter ('motza' likely refers to some form of medication or intervention), and continue this until his child stops suffering. Here 'mays si temes...pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias,' suggests that temporary relief might be provided through
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	 And if there is an abscess or apendicitis in the child's abdomen (literally "if you suspect appendicitis"), decapitate it, and then ensure that this removal procedure has been correctly performed ('adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidita'), along with its subsequent healing as outlined by our understanding of treatment for such conditions. Here 'E ja accideys...consolidacio' implies a medical action taken to address an abscess or similar condition, and the use of words like 'inscidido,' which means cut open surg
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of caring for the ulcers that occur at times.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The leaking sinuses that occur in the lower part of the body or within one area, which arise from behind or below:
E es una fistula o motas.	Es a fistula or hernia now appearing in place of pauses within the patient' extram
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that ancient connection is conducing moist and vaporous white or slight effluvia (discharge), and some of these fistulas have pierced through, it implies an old humoral imbalance in the body where fluids are not being properly regulated. The reference to 'antiquated connections' suggests long-standing medical conditions related to fluid dynamics within the patient’s system leading possibly to edema or other pathologies associated with poor circulation and accumulation of bod
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	These penetrating ones are held onto by this moist discharge which is coming out and causing issues with expulsion (evacuation) as well as ventilation; some use the malady of evacuation, while others suffer from these conditions themselves—indicative that there may be a variety of blockages or obstructions within their body systems affecting waste removal. This highlights an underlying problem wherein certain areas might experience difficulty with eliminating bodily fluids and gases due to possible constipation (evacuation malady) as well as dyspnea, implying issues related not only to fluid retention but also respiratory dis
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	Consequently for some fistulas that are within the hollow spaces of these structures, and inside parts of their body such as bladder or intestines; there exist other penetrating ones between thighs' joint (indicative hip flexure area) into buttocks’ cleft. These descriptions reflect anatomical knowledge from a historical perspective where fistulas may have been creating pathways for fluids and gases within these cavities, potentially leading to infection or further complications if not addressed by the healthcare provider of that era using their contemporary understanding and tools available at the time (e.g., cautery).
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When it is known that an open and penetrating (or purulent) fistula enters into the rectum, but not exiting or discharging therefrom; this means you place the bowel end within the rectum, and introduce a fine wire of silver or iron into the fistula when no tendernthy rupture.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If in that condition, they enter the subtle underground of lead or wool where you feel it (the ailment) within your body' extrication is necessary to remove them from there.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you do not feel that one of them for any cause of digestion or worms and windiness, as we have said before, then understand it does not penetrate, and thus take care of yourself accordingly.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or meat of the urethra, it signifies that I must treat with urine from there to such an extent as to make the medical place solidified.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	May it be that something penetrates into the joint of the thigh or enters the bone and causes pain throughout the circuit, then this person is prone to enter here if not already in the state of obstructions within the bone, causing additional pain at the point of departure; which must now undergo immediate treatment without delay.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those perforating wounds there is not a cure, and the work of these doctors on what they have firmly done affects their spirits.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	When it is not permeating and does not age as recommended by you, hope springs from the iron that has already been used, which will come when needed.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva les cambes de lu entrem elles, les coysses sian inclinades al ventre d'elles, i apropi entrarem tentar per obrir la fistula tertulatòria si es en ella.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	If that person feels heat entering through their colon (implying a blockage or inflammation), immediately insert the passed stool into their rectum to relieve it there.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If you feel a thrust in the belly and suspect that it has entered there from between your legs or flesh, be certain that this is penetrating; therefore do not attempt to touch it there anymore, for it will no longer harm where it already exists, as we have discussed.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	May there come physicians who heal with cold cups in healthy patients' bodies.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the attempt goes inside and does not penetrate up to where it is in your belly, between that which one hopes will become flesh or bone matter, then dry out the wound on the surface of the navel; also do so with respect for the fistula from within its originating cyst (or tumour), and once dried by touch inside this area where the extremity of the attempt is located, it becomes released and freed.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	Return cleanlingy those stones that have been connected by the penis and needle, which haven't ruptured for any reason yet.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	May it happen that the flow of sanction sometimes enters between you and your abdomen when those stones are inside them; then with instruments used for pus purge or acute medicine, cauterize at the focus to adjust good habits: thus correction of those stones set in place is achieved, and extravasation (seepage) of sanction from dilated humors.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	In those treatments in which stoppage and execution are concerned, when health is restored and there' extrinsically ceases to be necessary the repetition of them.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	May it be that the fistula has entered into the belly of you and is lengthened on your skin surface, then insert it into the intestine therein, and ask about its location within.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	So if one hundred times the attempt and between you and her it is covered by flesh or meat, and they are prone to invasion, then there will be no operation in sight but rather a path of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The text is a medieval medical guide discussing the treatment of conditions related to joint pain and hernias:
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When some treatments according to this method are used and you insert a thread into the fistula, it is when the extremity protrudes through the surrounding flesh at the navel area and on the edge of the belly, pulling out with surgical needles as per these instructions.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert into that faithful covering of fields or boundaries they have set, and attempt to insert the finger within the forked part where continuation occurs after it.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	May if it penetrates into the margin of the anus properly inserted therein; then withdraw and adjust both ends, each time new, leave for a day or two until you may find that the point has entered the flesh where those ends meet between the feet'se extremities and testicles.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Return care for what is solidified and healed inside.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then do so as you prepare it in any manner at your discretion, but only if necessary before the lesion gets deeper (and this is for your own good). Then apply what has been prepared to that which is healed within.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	La spigamento spinous is where the fistula forms; its curvature causes sharp pain and the other division does not cause such acute pain, so it's only necessary when needed to apply pressure with forceps a few times.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	From the seam of hemorrhoids where blood flows in that part.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Embarrassment comes in two ways: either between the belly appearing like it'se made of grain and fatty substances such as these are those that come out; or from within the cavity, which seems carbuncles filled with similar materials to fat.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	From those small and large, which the sanction of these times is one, and their movements are similar, and from outside comes impurity into limbs; in the extremities of it all.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	Whenever there are openings in the lower part of the body due to scant moisture, and where a lemon-like water or a small drop of sanctus chrism flows constantly according to the color of the body, then it is as follows:
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for that which she has inserted into her colon is to command the malady (illness) to settle down and come out within it, whereupon its humors appear before you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Now you should bite and press with your teeth the areas where those points are made by your nails, and position yourself so that they can strike those very same places on their skin with forceps or tweezers to remove them.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	May if the needles are not in those places due to their moisture and softness, then take those sharp cloths or metal instruments or waxed linen for them, place these on the points of those that cause pain, grind some ash dust onto those areas as part of cauterization; apply this after what precedes in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	When caring for it is necessary that they be healed within which they are being treated.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the belly does not accept exhalation, then crush it with a small pestle in which biting is done and wash it with that water present in the bowl where gas escapes when the abdomen expands during emesis (vomiting).
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, their cause is dampness, and it'thy to grasp those with thy finger or thumbs; insert them therein, and take care of them until they become healed as you have stated beforehand.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	Here is the line-by-line translation:
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	When it is necessary for all of them (humors), and not one taken away from that particular area, so that the excess of this yellow bile may flow through that specific place.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place your hand over the belly, dipped in oil or cloth, and that same one on the colon to command the humors within it to stop.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Return that which is within the box when it has been healed; and once cured, take care of those inside with oil or other remedies contained within so as to maintain their health.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of caring for fistulas (assuming "fistulas" refers herein to some type
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	 During persistent torture, they suffer from either a crack or natural hardening of the skin/teeth/bones etc. (assuming "fistulas" was meant to refer to wounds and not actual medical term for fistula). Here's an
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	When they are ancient and not effective in that medicine, I tell you to make an incision with sponge cautery or your own finger (if it is moistened within the discharge of said pus), which prevents them from healing; and for these ones placed inside where consolidated [meaning they have formed a solid scab/crust], proper care must be given.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	You hold those aggressive rubs that entered when the first motion and are now scraped, and into care these ones go to be healed after being scraped.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of curing wounds, it is key or essential.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You understand that when the joints are bound and not properly aligned according to the color of the body' extrinsic to the clavicle bone, it affects the entire body, primarily in the parts where pains occur at once with these aches - therefore you must adjust your clothing accordingly.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And now cover the fluid that has entered into the joint cavity and is in the knee or elbow areas, where it has been extracted from within its chamber; take care of this as well.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	If you wish, then burn the second one that precedes in his head.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	May small ulcers sharply pointed over the surface of the body and frequent movements come in the upper parts of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	In caring for them (the patient), extend and insert that piece therein or into it which is faithful/loyal to the inside of its container.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	If you wish, then burn it as previously stated, at the focus or in acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And now it has been removed from inside and outside with the tool which you directed.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	May there be a small or large infected worm on the surface of the body above and below it in the belly area; when this thing bites into you, it causes pain throughout your body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	Care for the patient involves using a penis of an oaken or iron rod as cautery and securing it firmly within the circle formed by the parts at the tip of this instrument; tighten your hand around that part inside which liquid has been introduced to maintain its position in the circuit, press down on the skin where fluid is contained until dissolution occurs, thereby removing the tumor from its place.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, make an incision with a silver or iron needle according to this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The part below the needle reveals subtlety, mute (not pierced), enveloped in such a way that above it is learned its absorption and rotation of said thing.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	If you wish to burn the worm as mentioned in the burning of the anus, then follow these steps for cautery:
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In terms of instruments used for administering cupping therapy (assuming this is related medicine or similar practice). Here's my translation line by line in English:
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some times it is pains of silver or tin ore forged objects or clay molded items; and some times these small instruments used by practitioners are either tiny or larger ones they administer to children'thy, the ailments from which their tails suffer being little.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	La form of scab is large and few:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the downpipe in which the bag is large according to this method; and it's at that distance where the bag was previously fastened.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	E the extremity of it has been placed down in such a way that is deaf to sound (hence not hearable), approaching subtlety; and in one side there are two disruveyers, while on the other aspect also a disruption exists, and its magnitude corresponds with grossness due to rays or thickened size by small amount.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And if it is in the bag where their potions of beast'dictum or sheep gut are paused and his hand is a palm:
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And if it is pierced through by disruptive movements when turned, and the space where this occurs between the disturbances belongs to its size:
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If medicine forces it out through the hole (the orifice), take as much as will pour out; and if vomiting occurs throughout the night, there is more healing in the morning.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you tighten that in the abdominal humors and eye illness of the belly'dictum (meaning), then repeat the application of the caustic within until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If there is bleeding or abscess in the belly (belly), then carefully apply pressure with the fingers of the hands inside where children are examined for diagnosis purposes (diagnosing).
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of curing diseases or illnesses (Note: The provided text seems like a rough translation rather than formal
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	In the division of curing diseases and ailments, it was decided what kind of treatment they would need for those illnesses and their corresponding remedies according to the plan (Note: The provided text appears fragmentary and somewhat archaic in structure. Here is an attempt at translation with some interpretation added for clarity):
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	So it is said that boils are diverse depending on where they form and how the pus exits them.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	May the humors that are present in the body cavities be allowed to ascend upwards like a worm above the head, or neck (the col), chest (pectus), belly (venter), waist (fitium), and resemble those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And when it is recommended that certain diseases are treated, and thus the attention is focused on those other illnesses as well.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	When you come upon simple diseases of the head, and when recalling complex conditions comes to the third capital (i.dictory or section), here it is for consideration/discussion at that level.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	So say that when it hurts in the head simply and is not a fracture, consider: if it'se due to skull movement or feigned illness, then thrust your spear into the forehead just enough (and do not delay), extracting as much of the affected area as possible where there is an abscess with pus formation under pressure. And remove what you find secondarily based on the amount of fluid present if no contraindication to suction exists, mostly when it's a worm infection and is scarce (few).
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	When it is a flaw in the contrary of the affected party, and watch over the abdomen to prevent distension from food and drinks heavy or large.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	May it be that if any cause of minute examination is prevented, the pain will lessen from food and not approach meat or drink.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	Pause on the wound if you press apothecary' extricate in oil or wine where it is staunched.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are secure with the application of cautery and pause over the ground (the affected area), provided that it has not recently rained, as this would have washed away the dust recommended for placing below (on the ground).
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	If the air has changed its quality, then place your hand within that wax cautery where it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the child is large or due to inspection of spaces and appearances, and their lips are not properly adjusted with puppets as recommended by them, then adjust those accordingly at once.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	May it be discovered that the child has cracked bone and skin, but not restrained by you with anything more than a small suspender, then examine this carefully using medicine to restore flesh back into the area of fracture, commanding malady (presumably referring to an infection or wound) to consume foods like capsules and forms suitable for them therein, ensuring proper healing within.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	If decay is present in the spine and does not adhere to the bone, then cut off all this putrefied matter completely with water and apply care to it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these diseases an artery or vein through which blood flows is not severed by medicine, then you should investigate the affected vessel; and if it has been damaged but not cut, incise that very same with a scalpel (or ligature), provided you need to provoke what we have mentioned earlier so as to cause bleeding.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these pains are simple and small, they may be due to humidity in the air; therefore, take powder on those areas until the moisture changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The purpose of the poultice is as follows: take one part of pressed oil made from eggs, two parts of powdered dragon'seeds, three parts that have not yet been extinguished; grind and crush it all together, using this mixture to fill (the poultice), ensuring proper constriction within which you can lie down on top. Additionally, allow the poultice to coagulate when mixed with blood of dragon's seeds.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Here is the line-by-line translation into English:
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	When any one applies solely cauterization when not in their own hands and without sanction of dragon blood,
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And now this operation is carried out on the large masses when it has been decided that they should be stopped and restrained therein, where these fluids have recently accumulated without change in air quality.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	If the air has been altered, and mostly during summer, you do not understand where to place this powder, then take care of those things we have mentioned earlier, so that you rest on these warm places with them; or pause over these bread crumbs made from flour mixed in water and honey inside which they will bake pies. Additionally attend to the other remedy while it is being healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If you have a broken bone in the body, and it is small, then extract blood from its movement.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	In English line by line translation of medieval medical treatise text provided above and for the given Latin phrase, it would be as follows:
De las plaguas del col.	From the throat diseases (or afflictions).
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If sickness occurs in the chest, there is no difference in medicine, and between the child'thy body when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	May the nerve of the col be inscribed or artery; if it is a nerve, then it'thy not in there but to avoid water-induced vigorous constriction treatment herein with wine and similars as for them their flesh cannot bear such.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	Ne does not stop on the ground any cause of total madness; for the substance of nerves is maddening and its continuous motion in all parts of the body, which it puts into all our limbs itself.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	If this person needs healing from the realm of simple medicines, take some warm water to bathe them in it; apply a poultice made with olive oil or without it according to practice herein described, and when bathing and using other stones as directed, anoint their sweat.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the child is large, then administer stitching or clamp their lips together, and take care of it until healed within there (inside).
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	May it be that if there is depth or pain in the lower parts of the body massage-worked by others, then they pierce through where the gout has penetrated to relieve pressure.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	May it be that in the patient there is an inserted artery and blood flow has been obtained, then separate or dry out/cauterize that which is necessary to provoke water into it.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	May you have inserted the vertebrae of the lower back or all, and thus preserved the veins in the neck, so that when adjusting them on the spinal column without touching it; afterwards return those to their natural shape, tighten them with sutures along the spine'se length, leave for some days until healed. Take care of these points where fixation and excitement occur within which helps in healing.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the child in their bone has pain before itching occurs, then I will strike that place; and if there are fragments of bone within them, remove all you can from those pieces; but if what is inside cannot be taken out with force, let water enter so that the child may detoxify internally, and they shall separate themselves along with their entrails being cleared away.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	If the child is new recently, then grind over that powder which has been recommended for you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If in the patient there is an opening (fistula), then cure that which will remember to come back into its cavity within their skull.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	When pleurisy or phantom pains occur between the shoulders and it becomes painful in the chest, waist, chair, or limbs (pleura), etc.:
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a lance or cudgel impact and sometimes depth is involved, and considering that the breech (patient's buttocks) may have been exposed to wind-borne dirt; consider that the clay/earth brought by these elements can be deadly. Here doctors understand that such contaminated earth or "clay" could pose a life-threatening risk when it enters the body through wounds, especially in areas where patients have been lying down (probably referring to their lower bodies).
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	If there is no depth and the slime has recently been in his body, then you pause him for the first hour after morning dew moisture, without tightening so that he does not retain within the depth of it and return to the heart, perhaps pausing with linen attracted (i.dict a compress), lifting those areas guided by previous indications throughout the day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	If the ointment is not at your disposal, then rest in the room where water collected on the ground to prevent moisture that causes humidity; and make sure gout remains above this area because it's adjusted there for its flow of fluid.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	Might three days pass without the patient suffering from cramps or spasms in their belly, nor convulsions of a bad spirit inside them, and if so, use other good means available to you; then care for that as well as any further cures within which they can be healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If healing of the patient is delayed and it has been long time already for recovery, then you know that a fistula (abscess) has formed; therefore, take care of this through your wisdom as a physician.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	If the swelling is due to a rupture or tearing of space or skin, and it's simple on the surface of the thigh or chest, then treat that area with water (if large) used for suturing, or powder if small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	May there be pain in the bone already, and their teeth are loose as well; if they have been separated from each other, use forceps to extract those teeth.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then let them be led out that the vermin may be removed from their bodies.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	When treating other sudden illnesses in the other body parts, it is healing as much water that we have described herein.
De las plaguas del ventre.	From abdominal pains/disorders.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The condition that causes pain in your stomach is great or small or wandering.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	From the great many courses are brought forth the nerve or tendon of it, so that they cause an invasion by them and their stitching is both strong and subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore the best resolution would be to move it, for in that place it is difficult just as with any of those specialized organs mentioned hereinabove.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	You know that there are four kinds of surgical threads for the abdomen, and if you need stitches they can be common ones used in surgeries on other parts of the body as well.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	When two other stitches communicate with each other, they may do so more or less within the abdominal stitch itself.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	Yeah recommends that you each have your own examination and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So when the child is small and suffers from any cause of hernia for that reason, it becomes difficult to reduce; either because of its diminutive size due to disruption as we have mentioned beforehand, or when the hernia swells up due to cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when the fluid is rising upwards alone or with a towel dipped in water squeezing it out gently (or submerging and wringing), alongside onions, cloves, and liniments applied within where inflammation should be resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And when water has been applied in such a way that it provides relief, and is better than the application of pure water alone for dissolving inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when the inflammation is resolved, then you moisten the intestine in the water where it has been elevated with vinegar and garlic, which helps to remove its cause from within briefly.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If the interior is spared from this treatment, then divide the rupture into small pieces using an instrument on which pins have been placed.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The initial part of the text translates as follows in English line by line:
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	From the tool, its form is as follows:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One sharp turn of the limb, and another not sharp, as well as the delicate end which is not like the subtlety of bone - both are blunt at one point.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the patient'thy condition is aggravated and the intestine protrudes out of its cavity, then make sure to reduce it back to its natural form within itself if possible in this place; for better health will be achieved as a result.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is wide and occurs in the lower abdomen, where you lay down the hernia on their back, placing cushions under them, while holding their head; if it' extruded below the navel, then hold their head as well with a pillow or some props that they have placed themselves.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	When it is necessary that water be applied on large wounds and for bleeding, then do so accordingly.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	In small pains, pause what you have prepared for it, and make that servant to be between your two palms held in hand, which contains the entire disruption at its middle point here below, adjusting the lips of yours as necessary according to where any stitch has been placed by yourself or another.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	Here is the line-by extralinear translation:
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Return the strength of both feet in the circuit of the arrow, and some manipulations with joints are done, adding bruises on lips and skin for better aggregation; lay down the bulkiness of that area and insert another needle into it, holding this second needle as well together with the first one used earlier. No matter how necessary to continue inserting needles until completing all issues related to intestinal protrusion.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	When fine needles move between inflammation and subtlety, where the small ones enter into flesh; and the large are difficult in the spine, thus they must pass through delicacy and size.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	Even where the needle is fixed in any of the body's extremities provided for it, so that the flesh does not tear apart and worm-like creatures do not burrow within its foundation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And they are not stitched up so that the patient is not prevented from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	Here comes the sentence for translation: Ensure you insert your fingers into the holes of all sewn parts, which are held by the tips of the needles; and place them there until you realize that the flesh has healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These sewing needles are inserted into the small wounds with careful use of a sharp instrument or two fingers, which is enough for their suture.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: "May the second stitch be conventional: and it is that you apply a needle in which thread of both fineness and thickness are wound, under the tongue for ease of use.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	When the needle is inserted into these four extremities by that midwife' extricated piece, reduce it with her hand to ensure that the fettered abdominal cavity part enters downward below its division and thus ensures that the suture made of cloth for which clothes are tightly wound.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	When there is a pause between any of the stitches in this part of the body (the larger portion), it means that sufficient time has been allowed for healing or restoration within those specific areas where sewing was
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	E aquesta sutura salvà l'home." translates to "Here, this stitch saves the body
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	The translation from the medieval medical text into English, line by line:
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	Here the child is consolidated in the spaces of fifteen days or more, and healed that one, and applied moisture for motion' extrication over time, within their arrangements.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	E the other physicians had not healed; and by miracle fire, they could no longer cure that which was in oil where neither blade nor medicine touched it at all, perhaps helping a little over two days with water of honey poured daily undernethy while foc burned.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	May you direct two kinds of sewing according to what is narrated by Parayllus.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	When you begin with stitching of the navel and insert the needle from the lower portion into the upper portion,
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And when the needle enters into the navel and also in that portion of the body where you previously inserted it, making short and long penetrations throughout all parts of the body, place the point where the needle was introduced at the other end' extruding part; make the needle enter this extreme side as well.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	When you have caused that entry herein, then make another entrance in those portions of the body where it was before absent and return to them; let the cavity which is there now be opened again by your hand and insert the needle into its other extremity at this place.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	When fluid (perhaps blood or pus) is entering the cistern through that portal where it enters, and this happens in the extreme end of which he's already inside there, everything flows into that space together within him.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Here begins with the side of this patient and takes that one to their extremity, where it is pierced by a needle from the cleft (of the buttocks), which then returns in place within that same opening therefrom; as does another similar piece inserted at its base.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And apply some poultice and another kind of it within what you are applying, as much as is necessary according to that which he needs (the patient).
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The sum total of this suture maneuver is that you sew the skin with a thread used for mending hairs, so as to make stitching along the extremity part of the coda (tailbone), and leave it until after completion.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	May the second type of suture proper to this art and recommended by it is that you sew up such half-strength material as they themselves use for sewing; applying its extremity with another piece from here, and attaching their chest part therewith in a way natural to them. Do so when instructed by the master'thy teachings.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you keep the needle at your side, and push it into that part of departure from birthplace as far as possible in that place, and turn over (or rotate) the needle to make penetration through two points on the chest; now adjust the position of the needle again.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	When you turn those bones, and let the chill humors enter into one another' extramundarily from their cavity in either of its two limbs simultaneously (this refers to turning or manipulating the joints).
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This stitching is better than ordinary simple sewing, and it's this one from which memory recalls.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Guilielmus (or Gil in English)
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	Even if the thread of their stomach has been sewn together with two needles so that you can insert your fingers into these, and begin inserting the other needle accordingly to those threads which have been cut along their chest where they are joined by hand (surgical suture), then proceed as follows:
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	When you understand that a disturbance occurs in the belly'm area (abdomen), it is more difficult to close its stitches than those of other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	May the art of medicine for common diseases be judged by other illnesses.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is when you continue the treatment of recent excrement in their sanctum downstream where air alters that which and return the intestine and hernia to its cavity, so your hand rests over that fleshly covering, thus preventing it from coming out.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	If the air has altered the humors and causes them to flow in that manner within you, where they become hardened and create fields around these areas; care for it as if curing other illnesses inside of which such purulent matter is found solidified into pus. Here we have a description related to treating abscessed or infected conditions by manipulating the body'dictions (humors) through various means, suggesting an approach consistent with humoral theory prevalent in medieval medicine where balance among bodily fluids was considered essential for health:
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	Might you not have the medicines with you now, then rest on that which is most immediately at hand; allow it to begin healing for today and tomorrow as long as you are accompanied by me in learning, until such time as health returns, after which you will no longer need other medical remedies when simple pains subside.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the vermin may cause injury to the main body parts, then submerge wool in warm or rotten oil, and keep it there while placing your hands between the joint angles where dislocations can occur.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	If you feel pain or putrefaction in your bowels, they will move slowly forward constantly; and if the obstruction has reached its cavity and is causing a protruding discharge within it, then:
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	Be aware that what is from the large intestine heals more quickly than what resides in the smaller bowels, understanding this can guide treatment choices for faster recovery of illnesses associated with these parts of the body.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: It is difficult for that which he calls "gegunu" (possibly referring to an intestinal obstruction or hernia) not to receive cure in this place; and it occurs because of many veins within him, as well as his large size therein, together with the subtlety of his body constitution, and proximity of that nature close to nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	May it be that the material you are processing is fabric and by following your precise technique on this freshly made cloth from which you reduce the swellings (edemas), thus alleviating them around where they manifest in a way that aligns with what has been reduced through treatment.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	May it be that space has been entered and black or dark substance (likely representing pus) is extracted here, by pressing this faithful part over the area where darkness occurs, thereby allowing the flow of sanctified fluids (blood), which circulate through veins and arteries in the tissue.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remember when you have infection inside the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, there's a possibility that it can be restored with herbs taken internally, for so you will receive what was causing pain inside your belly due to percussion of the lance and presence of fistula (and old pus), along with action and agitation.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Now you apply the treatment of him and it may cease subtly that which lies within his body where healing is taking place, strengthening the affected location.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And when a skilled individual experiments with being inside the budel (belly or womb), as per this manner of treatment: take large cushions; and adjust the lips of the patient within it, holding back one finger from where their mouth is open over these lips. When you hold onto that digit and tighten your grip on them, they will remain attached without dissolving away.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Return your pace or another form of restoration for the first, and do not cease doing so until you have formed another as per the quantity of all the fluid present in the body.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Return those things to the ground, and rub them inside the belly wherein the intestine is contained within it, so that nothing does harm from the malady upon any of its members.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine has been drawn out by threads delicate as those of animal innards placed undernezyme with a needle; and you hold onto these extremities of the threaded intestines, wrapping them around one another using said fine threads, then insert this wrapped part into holes in the body of the intestine itself, reducing it thereby to prevent rupture.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This method of stitching is not just a secondary means of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the child is large and wide, mainly if it's within one of the small intestines, then they are not directly involved but rather something subtle, and their healing will not be complete for all at once.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of treatment for hernias and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Understand that when all children and apostema become sickened and ulcers appear without consolidation or healing over time in any part of the body, universally it is called an abscess; this we call upon you (the physician).
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	In moistened bodies where sweat exudes (e), and if the wetness is dissipated within a few hours (es), it suggests that the body has expelled excess fluid or mucus, as per their understanding of humoral imbalances leading to such conditions.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Some moisture is moved here, and it's scant, dense, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	Here is the translation line by line:
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And have shown all these causes and their symptoms are in the realm of medicine therein.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	When you know how to heal an abscess caused by surgical intervention on the belly, it is essential knowledge for treatment.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	E recognizes that fistulas occur in all the body' extrinsic, those which reach to major veins and arteries, or nerves, spine, bladder, any of the ribs, lumbar vertebrae joint connections due composition mixture from head and feet; those through which proximity is brought nearer to main limb and resemblances.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore this one among these ulcers that is according to the current illness are diseases hard to cure and not receiving care, it engages labor and ignorance on itself.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If there is any depth in the ulcer that does not reach these places which are mentioned herein and you hope for its healing, and wish to gain knowledge of it, then try leather or iron attempts, and if the fistula afterward straightens itself out, ask her immediately.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	May it be that the fistula is twisted, then investigate with a subtle hammer what makes its own body rise and curve due to this twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	If there is an abominable ulcer present, it is not within your power to attempt on the patient directly.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Now apply the poultice on his flesh with their own ointments, whereby the moisture through which you are cleansing him will be drawn by those other preparations and from among them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	When you stand upon all these causes and see them clearly, then go to the cure according to confession: that is when you consider whether it's an apparent fistula near or far from joint connections, nerves, arteries, veins, or any of those places which belong to you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Here comes another sentence to translate:
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	May it be that the fistula is deep within and secondarily closed off; then ensure you insert that into the pre-existing cavity as much as possible to your reach, and purify all of its corrupted parts using enclosed medicines tightly packed in acuteness. And place those medicinal pills inside the cavity of the fistula which you have recognized with a ferret.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	When some humors need to be drained that have entered into the cavity of the fistula due to decay, it is for a short time allowed by acute medicine until they are removed from there.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And restore that which there is within it by means of this ointment, for these cause meat (or flesh) inside to be healthy while being healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not healed by this means, then apply cautery to that second which has been recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	May it be that the cause of fistula is from within and you must certify this; inquire about it as dry according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any causes related to vein or nerve or primary member issues which we have discussed.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If you discover your bones and there is any decay or impurity within, then treat that part where the decay resides completely; take care of it with whatever water carries life inside so that it may be healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	If it is not healed and the flesh has decayed as before practice, then you will realize that you have not reached the complete eradication of corruption; hence, immediately reassess both the reason for its presence and the purification process hereafter, and restore what remains.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it heals, eat; but if not, then understand that the corruption is in the deep cavity of the body, which has not yet been achieved, and therefore treat it further.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If your bones have been damaged or are small in size, then it is within your power to extract them using fine forceps which I recommend for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If you have a stone in the bones, extract all of them completely without leaving any cause for your strength to fail.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	May there be any cause of the moisture in them (the body), and within their understanding they have no fear or mistake; here you inspect those ligaments or bones that are present here, breaking the bones if necessary.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	May you not be prepared with tools for your bones of the hour, then place it on a bed where dampness nourishes that which is therewith and bring them inside when moisture arrives from those very same bones made of flesh and sinew; keep that wet substance undeveloped, forming what you have already inscribed in your work.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having a fear, pause over the bed soaked in oil above for three days or under an Egyptian couch or among any of their linens when they move those bands/ligaments, and bones are separated from them due to these attractions.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	May it be that there is much bone at the knees or thighs like those hereof, and when taken from them (implying removal of something), it leaves one's face for only so long, until such time as they retreat back inside just enough to prevent that blackness and corruption, thereby restoring health.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If water from within has caused great damage and the decay is already present in the bone marrow, then it becomes necessary to close that area where such deterioration reached, ensuring its containment for healing purposes inside this place.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And you should recommend that they go home to their thighs so as not to worsen the condition and assist in your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Foc an youth in their forties years old who suffers pain in the groin area where swolthy matter has entered into the body through which it is already fully established and constitutes great abscess; none of external origin affects this site specifically, as per its current state.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the time extended due to errors by doctors inside where the abscess has formed and disordered materials have come out, with treatment taking place within while a fistula is opened, there are in its essence those preparations made for that which they used beforehand as interventions. (Here we can understand this translation line-bymediate sentence: The time extends due to mistakes doctors make when the abscess forms and materials go out of order; treatment continues while an open fistula is present, during all these there are preparations similar to what was done earlier.)
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And after many years of treatment by doctors and not within those waters but in the body itself, he was called back to health.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And now they place the cushion under him, and all that runs from his body through this great conduit; and already his clothes are completely drenched in lemon-yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then insert the attempt into one of those instruments and bring the attempt up to the mouth (the instrument, possibly a medical tool being referred here).
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Return and examine quickly those instruments and tools, bringing them all over the parts of the chamber (presumably referring to different body cavities for treatment purposes).
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I cut and incised into one of those bones within which I had dismembered the limb, and extracted that corrupted part, it was already rotten and decayed, and blackened; and there was also already ruined a portion inside where something had penetrated to the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	When wine that I had discovered and prepared from bone is needed for me,
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And if it is not in the bone but that which has been crushed and sealed herein, you have already made a fracture or breakage of it, indeed there was previously a cracking apart.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Return your hand'softhe area for the restoration of the patient's health with conservative medical methods over long time periods, which is not yet achieved or solidified (consolidated).
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Return and explore further over the bones of the second part upon discovery in the first exploration, and continue to work on damage to the bones.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And when I have applied the poultice that was prepared for him and his healing has not been restored yet,
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And now you discover another wound and carefully insert the bone piece by piece specifically, performing its restoration completely until it is inserted entirely within one palm of your hand, taking out what was extracted from inside him (the patient), and restore that with medicines, thereby consolidating his recovery.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation:
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	Therefore, heals the whole body, and nothing is in the hard flesh of bone; it'thy disposition within his own body returns to health, and there are conversations with him that do not bring backwardness or harm during walking nor for any reason at all.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	May it be that the bone protrudes in the area where you have manipulated: then take hold of that second limb and stretch it out along its body, commanding a helper to pull this thicker yarn from above; place it over the flesh atop which the prominent bone rests, extending the skin around until reaching those parts designated by your intention. Hereby you will extract the flesh where you wish for cutting: ensuring that no flesh is carried away with the tool used for sectioning.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	When a blow or flat surface is applied directly to the face, it's permitted when not using a dull blade that doesn'thy corrupt flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	Here comes the sentence to translate: "Whenever the saw is damaged little by little at this place where it's in the concavity of the bone and does not appear when felt, then take another tool for sawing.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bones are decayed and not prominent, it is one continuous division or in its parts; thereupon you shall discover all of the body'thy flesh herewith - apply cold drafts firstly on this corruption itself (wherein lies continuation), and afterwards upon that part which has continued from where the initial severance was made. Take a blade for each instance, one to treat the initially wounded area as well maintaining it closed with intermittent icy applications; another dedicated entirely for addressing subsequent divisions along this line of injury.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And when there is a small hole in the location of decay as we have discussed,
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If decay is in the joint, cut out that corrupted joint, and saw off where it continues from another body part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	If decay is in the continuous flow of joints, it is not due reason but rather disease.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If the corruption is in the chest or the body, it'dict; however, when you seek out and discover this affliction within your patient, and remove that part as per any possible arrangement at your disposal, therein may be corrected for thee provided that no vengeance of veins nor disturbance of nerves occurs.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	Here is the translation line by line:
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	When you understand that this operation concerns the specific tool with which you hold it; when you are great in knowledge and long-standing experience of these instruments' uses, as well as witnesses of treatments for illnesses, then you have what is necessary to apply to your patient according to their needs.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When you prepare in this city'dictory, number and simplicity of tools with which will pause for use during your treatment that would be experienced by others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw (Note: The term "forma" here is likely referring to
Forma de autra serra:	Shape/Type of another'dictor or tool for cutting flesh, possibly indicating a specific kind of surg
Forma de autra serra:	Shape/Type of the other saw (Note: This phrase suggests that there is mention of an additional
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form or type of another large saw. The use of "gran" indicates a reference to something bigger than what
Forma de ray:	Shape/Type of the other blade, which could be referring to an
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Its head is shaped like the star-shaped keycap (or top), and its points are fashioned after staple clips/ejectors. This line from a medieval medical treatise describes how specific tools or implements, likely surgical instruments used for procedures involving metal fasteners such as buttons on clothing that needed to be removed due to health issues like ingrown nails (which may
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	But instead of conventionally treating them as such, they are rubbed against the joints when corrupted (or considered to be diseased), or it involves a wide-mouthed tool for this purpose. Here 'confricar' refers not only to physically scraping but also possibly applying friction with an instrument—which could imply using something like sandpaper, grinders, or
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of the larger blade compared to others. This likely describes a specific surgical tool that's bigger than
Forma de razori menor:	Shape of the smaller blades or instruments used for cutting (perhaps in comparison with other
Forma de razori lat:	Shape/Type of razer, possibly indicating a long saw blade designed for different purposes
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The shape/type of the other saw is described as having teeth (or points) made from steel and a shank that has been brought up to surface or work area - this suggests another specific type of surgical instrument, such as a hafted hand-saw with metal cutting edges. Here 'de ferr' denotes something crafted out of iron ('steel'), indicative of the quality and purpose ("for sawing") required for medical treatment in that era—pointedly different from household tools which were
Forma de lu:	The form of him/her (referring back to the patient
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	 The shape in which he/she has curved his/her razor. This sentence suggests that there is a specific curvature or design applied to the
Forma de razori autra subtil:	 Another subtle form of their razor, indicating perhaps an alternative method of shaving with finesse and precision implied by
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	 The shape of another curved extreme part (likely referring to a specific sharp or pointed component on the razor), emphasizing its precise role in providing an
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	 A small-looking attempt at shaving, possibly suggesting that this particular shape of the razor is delicate and finely crafted for close or careful
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	 The form of the blades which are inserted into his/her bones (possibly indicating a primitive medical tool used historically to insert metal points directly into skeletal structures, perhaps for setting f
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	 Shape(s) of another smaller instrument or device relevant in this context. This could refer to additional tools that were part
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	 The shape of another cutting instrument (which resembles a saw and the tip is what gets shaved into his/her bones), showcased in certain places on their skull. Here, "forma" refers to both design elements ("shape") as well as positioning within or upon something else – likely indicating some form of medical procedure where these tools are used with precision and care for the patient's head (often seen in historical practices). The sentence bl
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	 A saw-like shape that is suitable for piercing his/her bones, describing either the cutting tool or technique used to make incisions with precision. This line might be discussing an appropriate design of a surgical instrument intended specifically for penetrating hard t
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	 And its tip is pointed and acute, indicating that the tool in question has sharp points designed to pierce or cut precisely without causing unnecessary damage – possibly an autopsy instrument with a specifically shaped
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is iron from India, and somewhat like what has been said about cuts and incisions and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	From the joints of the limbs and bone fractures.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are painful either internally or externally, or when you treat that corruption with these medicines and the cure does not relieve it, sometimes the corruption wanders without being affected by any cause; therefore, insert your hand into this limb to remove evil humors from above where they may escape death or malice – for such is more damaging than natural wear of that body part.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the name of that person, it is because their limb has become blackened from being beaten until the focus consumes them within that part where pain enters into his body (and spreads throughout his whole body), and therefore you will know this individual intimately.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	When it is caused by the disturbance of certain poisonous causes, such as sea serpent bite or worm infestation and similar creatures/beings,
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the decay or rupture is in the affected part, then cut and do not give space for it so that it does not enter into its cavity.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	If you reach inside the body (presumably through some form of intervention or examination), then make an incision in that portion near the fire'dictum, and do not give space for decay within the flame area of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	If that individual encounthy enters your arm within the cleft in their waist, then
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	If another passage occurs and I send the cough to that place, then in that case it is death of humors; treating this other cause requires a certain amount of virtue (or medical skill).
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	When there is a softness in the part of the foot that deteriorates or worsens, then you must incise it into one of the nuts (likely referring to an abscess).
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If you climb up on the leg, then cut it all over the leg.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	May you enter into the navel, then you will incise into the cushion within its joint.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If rot (corruption) has already reached the sinews, then it is not an ingress but expulsion from within you for malady'dictor; remove the evil humors to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	Here comes the translation:
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	When cloth is wrapped around the entire body such that it does not touch the injured area and drains away any adjusted injury or applied poultice (plaster), here begins:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If the flow of sickness occurs while working, then immediately cauterize the affected spot thoroughly or place some restricting dust on it; and return to your medicine within which treatment is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Return its injured limb securely attached to what is suitable and take care of it so that healing occurs within.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And you recommend that the person who comes home with pain in their foot due to darkness and dryness (which is what I recommended), which incident happened there, it was because of cold accumulated from fire exposure.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	When that corruption occurs initially within its body where one must attend it entirely on the foot,
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that home prepares for the patients to go towards their member where they feel pain and heat from within them; insert your finger into the joint, and heal it there with focus.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time ago this illness occurred in that part of the body indicated by him/her (doctor).
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And now I am affected by it, and so my body has been forced to absorb that excess water which rests above the surface of medicine; cleanse the cosmos within you; this surplus does not affect me further nor moves into another part where it currently resides in your system.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	When they are put down and return to their soil, that very same dwelling place comes back into me who has prepared it thoroughly with care, and is healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	Not just for the account of this illness but to aid those suffering from it and as a signifier that represents its meaning and purpose:
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of care for the belly and the quality of enema administration with medicine.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When abscess is present in the patient's flesh and tendons, its space extends within as long as it collects disease; remove and perforate it, treat the illness herein contained, applying dressings previously used if available, with a thin linen cloth underneath for protection of the catheter. It has not reached any further corruption nor entered into bone or nerves/tendons yet—no fistula formed; seek healing through touch and gentle massage without forceful manipulation.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Indeed if spaces are extended within that which precedes decay in any limb, it is then called a fistula and cannot return to normal.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	E the cure of it is that when you have immersed that thong entirely while turning around and mostly when it feels like a cloth, ensuring not to stick due to its decay.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the bowels will stick together and that this putrefaction has not occurred through any other means, then when there is pressure in the intestine, attend to it with a cleansing enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: "E es que consideras al sinu," and if it is great, and when you smell the brake that'ish from fetent odor, apply this Egyptian medicinal concoction made of oil, honey, and worms in a vessel. They are adjusted inside where the medicine will be poured into the navel to permeate downwards towards the melancholic part (the spleen).
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	When that part is brought outside, and it takes as much time until the sinew is purified and modesty regained:
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the ulcer does not tolerate Egyptian medicine or ashes of charcoal water, then clay and honey are mixed therein three times; this mixture with wine and honey is used for cleansing and washing it off, due to the property of honey which moistens and adheres, mostly when excessive dryness and stasis have occurred.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	When you have done a few washes and feel that the navel has swelled up, then cleanse what makes flesh to discontinue its production in there.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	If the opening in which the catheter for the enema is not accepted by the intestine, then gradually increase that small amount of metal inserted therein, pausing its expansion within a cloth wrapped in Egyptian oil or olive oil until it has been sufficiently increased.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	When the suppository is large enough, then you will insert your lips into it and place as much of its quantity inside the rectum where it belongs in addition to what has been inserted with a clyster (suppository).
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	If the patient'dict fluid with which their brace is filled rises above where it rests in them so that when the brace constricts at its curve, as soon as flesh therein created by body fluids takes place within him/her through this conduit.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If it is not possible to extract the fluid within the bone according to your wish, then puncture that which you have prepared for this purpose on the limb and ensure that nothing remains in the region preventing its extraction.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	E apply consistent remedies that are placed on the suitable curve for expelling what tries to extend beyond those upon the cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	E the cloth is as large as it facilitates communication throughout the entire curve of the body; and fix them with thread at the right side of the cavity of the body, an ample amount so that within this space there can be a sufficient place for treatment to take effect without disturbing the drape greatly. Place additional cloth from their garments according to the quantity needed over another piece underneath as directed by the size of the cushion; rest it on such distant part of the body's cavity so that healing will occur in this area, ensuring not to press down heavily upon the large drape for a period of one week.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	When someone is above the hump (belly), which stiffens at any given moment for that fluid adjusted in their chest region, it causes discomfort immediately.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	To understand if what moves from your body is moist or dry, whether it's being digested properly or not digested at all.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	When you thus examine the location of that bend, if in it the patient feels pain or has an abscess, then proceed accordingly:
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	When your medical treatment is prolonged in this manner, and the material that adheres to the orifice of the sinus remains attached, when you remove it daily (or on the third day), after removing the filth, change the cloth for another one; thus maintaining cleanliness.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	Might it occur if the sinus allows space for subtle viruses to enter, do not despair of its adherence; where healing homes form at times when meat is present in bodily fluids during illnesses and on which his discomfort occurs, therein lies recovery.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If from the bend they dislodge themselves during rest or digestion, you understand that the belly does not hold; and if delayed adherence of the stomach is prolonged, then adjust with medicines for cleansing them out, and when moistened by their substance and nature, dry up wet dung together while they are in excess supply.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And when it seems that way here, without a brace on hand, apply heating oil then use this; or take frankincense and myrrh and waxes, sprinkle them all over the oil while using heat above (and cover cloth and tight clothing), where these substances are applied to what you have inserted that is swelled.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Here are the translations for each line of text:
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the swelling persists and does not heal with this treatment, you will understand that the corruption is in the body's interior, so investigate bones or other hard parts of the body; already know how to treat fistulas as instructed above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of treatment for paresis (weakness) and wounds of nails, as well as incision and cutting.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici it applies the wax that has not been used for days on either the sole or part of the foot and others as well; when prolonged, its treatment is highly valued, whether an application of cautery to harden the unused wax or corruption occurs, further decaying all at once, and entering into bone within which it fades away. Here comes a translation line by line:
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have obtained that same water which we mentioned in the division and do not interfere with your treatment, then remove all excess moisture from the skin using iron and apply caution to the affected area where this water is present; thus healing will be promoted.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is sound and the wound healed, then you apply ointment to remove scales from body parts divided by splinters, beginning with puncturing that spot on the point of the nail where it pierces flesh; pressing this outwardly while holding said area ensures removal without causing further injury. Continue until all foreign matter is extracted and everything becomes softened for easy extraction – provided you keep an eye on any remaining corrosive substances within, applying salve when needed to aid healing internally (and externally). Monitor closely the place where pressure was applied with care so that it remains smeared inside while being cured.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If decay has already set in the bone, then you must insert it back into its place and extract it out, for there is never a time when a rotten bone can heal within the body.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the thigh and calf are going into the leg as it is supposed in its memory, then carefully ensure that such one enters so that it can heal.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	May if on the thumb by tapping or pricking and in that intense pain, you come to perform an incision into the thigh, and with dry sponge apply pressure above the transverse abdominal region under it (the area beneath), whereupon the excess flesh adjusted over there may cause severe discomfort of the appendix; take care not for this bandaging fluid enters its location again.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	May be adjusted, which is found in the bodies of strong men who are fully muscular or have full bones and hair; this condition can also exist within their joints (or ligaments).
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	When it is moisture in its natural state at the joint or when it originates from within these dry nodules of their body.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	May not one born in damp nuts of this disease become ill and he who is born at strong joints shall suffer greatly from it.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	From those who are fat and their section is light (meaning a part of the body with less mass), you must insert that portion into the spleen stone made of bone marrow (possibly referring to an internal cure or treatment involving manipulation within this 'spleen stone').
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	May those born in the place of joint connection find healing difficult; therefore, be mindful of your abdomen for them.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May those born in this place take nuts to their meal, which you insert into the body's flesh making it round inside the bone, and select one of these instruments for them, and apply care that they heal within.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	May consolidation that occurs between their movements or due to home births they did not experience themselves, or for cleaning children'thy cradle fires, and thus the covering tightens into what it originally was until those very same returns back where its form naturally is restored.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	Here comes the translation of each line:
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	When a compound is formed in the fingers (palms), then dry it off as soon as it's prepared and adjusted to fit the shape of the body part.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From an infection or disease (inscizia refers here likely to a sickness), they become swolthy/varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Variations in size are varicose veins that come into motion within the limbs of the body and predominantly occur in couches (beds) or beds, especially among travelers, workers, and bearers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Now administer purge of the bowel from cholera black fever some times for forceful excretion and apply bloodletting to the patient' extramedullary vein (the large saphenous or small saphenous).
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	1. May the cure for them be that it is made clear and drawn back that sick black bone, and also another remedy: raising up their vein and extracting in its entirety.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of the patient is second according to this method: fasten the cushion on their buttocks so that the large sac (sacrococcygeal junction) becomes resolved within it, and secure the cushion's back part under each knee joint where a bandage has been placed. Dry up veins in one or two places as per section wide; raise the black sack between their buttocks with your hand inside until you remove its quantity that you wish to drain (aspiration), and this will take away the fluid from the sacrococcygeal junction, within which they have come down.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Return it back here (referring to some previously mentioned body part), and command that person not consume the black dysentery-producing foods.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Repeat the cauterization for varicose veins when they become swolthy and return to the malady (swollen area).
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	May their elevation be according to this manner: if you raise the cushion of the thighs and immerse it in water until they swell up and veins become exuberant; or when exercised vigorously, without bathing at present, so that the limb is bruised.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Return the colon in its right place along the vein either at the back or buttocks of you must remove it.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	So when you withdraw from under the neck, take that white thread back which holds together your string (ligature).
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Return your tool that has been raised and placed under the belt, and hold it with one hand for no longer than an ounce of gold (or in modern terms: not too tightly).
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And apply another layer on that section for three days, and scrub the crotch area below where blood appears within those three days.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Return that and cut it above the first part of the foot, raise it within where the second part begins, and lift/raise (it) from over there to be inserted into the portion above it in said sequence:
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	When you draw out that which has been put into the private part or any of all parts, until everything is extracted (i. end), then incisorily cut it off.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If you do not obey and lift up, insert a double-pointed needle made of iron and thread that one through it outwards; or if by chance the point gets stuck in something inside him, rotate your hand throughout to ensure everything is settled within where they are lodged.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When that entire atmosphere has been purified by immersion in water and oil (rosinated or non-rosinated), placing the area where it was submerged there to cure whatever is inside.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the vein has contracted and caused twisting in all parts of it, and not previously mentioned here, then cut along that area where there is contraction throughout its entire tortuous path and surrounding envelopes, place your hand inside what you have cut out so as to lift up everything taken from within.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Here comes the sentence to translate: And guard your cord that is not inserted into the vein and does not trouble it there; serve diligently in this matter as well.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the patient who is experiencing weakness:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of anointing oil:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	No one is inflated in the abdomen like a cushion nor has sharp extremities that could harm the vein; for it possesses great flexibility, even if subtle, allowing the vein to be inserted there due to excess bulk we have brought with us.
De extraccio venae cruris.	De extraction of the vein in the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is born in the hollows of lands that are down there, as with Ategi on Arabic and Indian lands where scarce vegetation or grass does not grow nor sprout up.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And when it is born in other parts of the body such as cushions or belts (other places on the body), then so be it understood that these are manifestations elsewhere and not solely within joint
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And when the pregnancy is from decay that comes quickly, observed within a short time in the belly button area with poisonous venom of snakes and worms born between the navel and skin (this could refer to early signs or complications during pregnancy involving harmful substances).
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And this sign of susceptibility for his arrival is in this inflamed area of the couch; and you will find it here, as if a vein starts from there that looks like plant roots downward.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the extremity appears, wrap it around one of those wooden balls from which is attached the leg of a drake (dragon), and do not touch that wood; instead, place your hand above it to prevent contact with the metal ball suspended on the cushion.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times you have experienced discomgy from it hereinabove mentioned causes in the parts beyond (the body), enclose them within lead and spices for that purpose.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If the matter is prolonged, then you cut a part of it and wrap the wound; do not insert that piece inside where pus has come out—if so inserted, then seal it within the flesh to cause suppuration (infection) and bleeding in the location and sore.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For that which is treated gently and taken out little by little must be extracted from the foot' extramittled without causing pain in the limb.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	From this vein in men whose length of hand and foot has reached me, I have perceived one coming up to my count of two finger lengths.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	If it is inserted during the time of his medical treatment, then insert an arrow into its abdomen and pierce that long intestine within the body cavity until all excess fluid contained in it has been evacuated; administer rot (rotting substance) to this area for several days as part of medicine. And take care of those appendices with proper attention.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And there are sometimes varicose veins that appear in the leg or at the knee and come with chilly humors, coming from some of these constricted vessels.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And so care for that ache which we have discussed in division and with what is mentioned above,
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From cutting out worms generated under the skin and called disease of cattle.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is called in no land without our bovine malady due to long journethy between the belly and body, where it lies hidden betwixt the navel and flesh, moving throughout the entire body, showing itself through each member's limb until breaking down the joint and forcing it out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The generation of him is due to the putrefaction of some humors, worms and snakes, and roundworms in his belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you intend to heal and extract it (the patient), make sure not to move the leg or appear in motion while doing so; then hold tightly that which is above as well as what lies beneath its tendons, firmly pressing both dry on top and below where necessary, until such time.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	If there is a blow on the flesh and you do not bandage it immediately, then stop using cautery near where the injury resides; its main cause of infection lies here with which we currently deal.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	May you again find that way into the upper part of the belly hole and tighten over it firmly; then remove it, ensuring that when the bloat uses its own body to self-medicate through expulsion (purgation) of foul humors with drugs or foods causing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From above illness worsens.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is named in our land and its pain appears in the limbs; it can be transferred from one limb to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	When you have seen that second one who recommends it to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You called upon a sick woman to the village and discovered her arm with a small abscess in the vena funis of the arm; you left it open for an hour, possibly adding a poultice as if she were alive when running from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	Now pain enters that location and settles in the muscle, here we apply it for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	When correction is done in the other limb while entering into it from here,
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And recommend I should move through my body as soon as possible, and it becomes very remarkable due to the exchange in limbs (movement) and their speed within each other'thy self(body).
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: "E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	May not there be humors in the vessels of a woman as well?
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	Even though one does not think it is due to water (since the woman was thin and had bare legs and exposed veins), here comes a change in feeling because of this displacement by water.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that it does not appear again in those who are delightful and have a thickened vein at the joints of their body during this back treatment.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	When you wish to heal the patient and they feel that pain, at this time it does not appear as if help is on its way for us today; however, be strong over them now with their leg elevation and drying of what inside there has been constrained by pressure—and then cauterize the location.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	May you not delay in treating the painful parts of the body; otherwise, promptly address and remove that part from the body along with what expels winds astutely, which includes those putrid pills and medicines like emetics and similars.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From extraction of pus (implying an implication that there might be a need for draining or removal
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Garlic is varied according to species and the parts of which I cook them in my body, for it's diversity that from those with large points, small ones, concave/curved shapes, hardness; as well as those having three angles (likely referring to cloves or pieces), where there are tongues present—and on others featuring stalks.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	Here is the translation of each sentence line by line:
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	When the chest senses cold and pressure is applied to it (and tears form), sharp pain occurs over the brain that intensifies greatly due to forceful onset of heat, causing blindness, dizziness, groaning in the mouths, inflammation and tongue complaints; spasms and confusion occur as well along with vomiting resembling cholera. The word disappears from memory entirely (loss of speech), while disintegration occurs to these words/thoughts at this location where wet humidity appears white like phlegm, causing exhalation similar to the state of meat'dictate
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if it appears in your legs, do not attempt healing or removal of the stone unless necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	May the shoulders of the sacrum when they come in the chest, so that they are close to the left breastbone, and it is firmly fixed there for a cause not related to fever; moreover, its movement resembles that of the arms and legs, as if crawling on dirt beasts black skin, and causes discomfort at the extremities, shivering, fainting - therefore you know death will come upon all.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	When the lungs are suffocated by thick breaths from pests in the colon and their colors change due to this condition, great spirits exit forcefully, demanding a ventilating apparatus for air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	If the swelling is in the skin where it covers the waist and the pain comes from the small backs, then there will be a large intense pain accompanied by breathing difficulties, but not all of the body'dict members'.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If there is gas in the stomach, it will rise due to some improperly digested food from below.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If the stone is in the belly and stuck there, then some opening of a crack or web may be made where it is located, but there is no hope for its extraction through that means.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the stone is in the bladder and there'supurates urine, with causes present within the parts empty of urine, then pain occurs over the abdomen; moreover, you understand that it is deadly.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	May the other members be with you as your face, chest, and shoulder blade (glenoid), along with shoulders and limbs, are preserved according to major principles when the lance does not damage veins or arteries nor is it poisonous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	Yeah recommends that you have seen of these teachings, so as to indicate through water regarding the treatment cure.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that there's an excess in the tear of his eyes within their nose chamber, and it extracts this from another part of its body using the auricular herb greases, thus healing without harm to his throat region.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	Extract another piece from the judge where it was found in their belly'dict (body), gently palpating at intervals, and that object itself had been concealed therein; this extracted item was one of the sharp daggers used by Turks, akin to a lion without claws.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	When the Senate convenes, it does not happen in its own chamber of mishap/accident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	Extracted another sop from a home of the Cresta people who was caught in the thicket and it was an Arabic remedy; I took hold of that very one myself, which had already been immersed in the herb garden thereof; consequently, with care, removed it gently from between its guides (probably referring to a patient's body parts), extracted it out completely from those gardens and healed the Cresta person.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	Extraction from within the home of someone who was taken in their belly and considered dead because of that; consequently, I kept the hole open for XXX days without any change caused by his dispositions, focused on what had been extracted, engineering it therein, and thus healed, not falling victim to illness at hand.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And in the house where you chase a stone within their two legs, and secure it over them tightly with clay or mud, place a flame above for an hour to heat up the area of the thighs containing the stone.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And another person comes who has been beaten on their face and whose swelling is settled with flies that do not provoke pain here nor seem to have any effect thereon.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	Extracted from the chest of the king'thy lungs where it was being caught in our nose area and had already descended into the seventh segment with complete concealment.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And it is called in three days for its extraction by means of cupping therapy (cupping or suction treatment).
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And so you tighten the child of Saturn through strike, and inquire if that touch is subtle or not felt; perhaps it will feel pain when pricked by a sharp lance, indicating that the touched point belongs to the extremity of Saturn.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And place the location in which ascent and digestion occur firmly anchored here, so that it appears above where I perceive its position of descent, over there.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And now you pause above basic medicine sharp and corrosive for a few days until heat appears, during which time you apply it thereon, and rub away its extremity subtly, so that it sticks to the metal.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Here the adjustment should be made in the food consumption for that specific medicine within which I notice an improvement of the swelling part and after four months it will pass by itself according to my observation time frame.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	Here are the translations line by line:
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The skilled physician compares little over motion, and about water which is present there; whereby foreign causes enter when you are sickened.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And so it is said that splints are not inserted into the parts where they are fixed, but according to two methods: either by attraction of the place in which intrude or contrary to the other divided portion.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	When someone is born into this place, or they enter it crudely in the flesh and are drawn out again,
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If you do not observe treatment during the hour when it is given, then continue applying it for several days until the meat from your body (the source of illness) has been drained away and the discharge/exit has ceased.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: If you find yourself seated and not urinating as before, then do this exercise daily in some capacity of cleansing or bathing; already cured by now.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If you do not obey the days for your treatment today, then when you pierce through the circuit of the saddle in that bone part from head to toe, it will be enlarged within the area where the saddle is situated, and extract that out.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the splinter is lodged in the bone of the head and has already proceeded into one of the chest'dictions (brain cavities), appearing there as those accidents which are said to be, do not remove it from the bone; but if the splinter perforates through this layer, its death will then proceed within.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the stone is not fixed in the bone and does not pass into the chest cavity, but rises to the throat over several days without being caused by these accidents, then your engineering must be done on the hook of the stone and at the attachment site for you.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	May it be fixed and not because you wish to extract (it), then apply compresses in the circulation area of the saddle as we have recommended, taking care that the place within which it is healed remains so.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	May it be that the thorn is also hurt in the location of your body and wounded by feelings, then you ask for this painful thing which touches you, and if you feel it, pull it out with the aid of something firm to make things convenient for taking away from yourself.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	If you cannot operate on it due to the constriction of the flesh and the length of the vein, there are no nerves or vessels present; here, perform an operation within the body where everything is expanded for extraction purposes.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	If you have an ulcer on the part of your body where flesh has been removed in totality, and upon which surgery is planned; if you cannot remove the flesh from its evasion within that fracture caused by those same nails, then:
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When you administer the extraction of pus in any location where it is lodged, then use your hand' extrication tool with all parts inside that contain said abscess; and subtlety as to not break off this exudate and maintain its difficulty for both yourself and during the procedure.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you cannot stand on that of your time, then lie down for several days until the parts in their circulation are healed, and repeat this process as needed when they recover.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	May you cause contrary flow of sanct (sanguine), and therefore apply what we have mentioned for healing in your clinic/chapel.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	So that you can contract the saddle (which refers to a type of pain or discomfort often associated with conditions like gout), so that the malady is held within according to its figure; for it may benefit.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	May it not be within your power, then use what is within your power for figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	May the tools that have been removed by others or any part of it has already proceeded in other parts, or causes further disruption outside its designated place and with increased frequency; hence you cover it again; this is the second time applying forceps based on the extent todicted herein. Now apply these considerations when treating:
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If retained in the bone, then twist it according to contrary motion until the substance enters into the bone and magnifies within you.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	If not, leave that for cooler days, and continue doing so until they go into combustion (or become inflamed).
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If it is from the seed of thorns that this one belongs there, then you will pull him along with it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	May it be that the cautery has been struck and you wish to administer inward force, then insert therein if it is dull-tempered, gently push it into the hollow of your body so as not to thrust it back upwards towards the opening of the saddle.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the seat (presumably a part of an instrument or body used for medical treatment) is hollowed out, then push that solid substance into it whereby the object will be drawn in by that force within said cavity.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the pus is discharged, then you must contract all of the flesh where it really comes out if possible with water and apply that which suits to treat it when necessary.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the swelling is in the chest, abdomen, bladder, or ribcage and it presses against what you touch therein, then rub that area with oil (or similar substance), apply pressure on that spot if possible to alleviate discomfort, remove whatever object causing irritation from its place, treat any ingested matter within the body as needed, and cure that which is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps with which slippers are drawn:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	These are their limbs like saws when they take hold of the strap to prevent them from falling off.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	From those come various sizes of pains: large ones, small ones, and migratory types, according to the magnitude of the humor excesses (i.dict), its paucity, the size of the swelling, and the contraction within it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The form of constriction from this limb is accompanied by pain as if in the abdomen, and pressure exerted on that area causes discomfort to push out its intestine. Here means a physical restriction or tight band around the affected body part (limb), causing severe internal distress due to potential displacement of organs within, leading to acute pain reminiscent of abdominal cramps:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of driving out sound limb injury:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	aychemy when it is that his internal organ has been drawn out into the hollow of the belly and forced by this way,
De fleubotomia de las venas.	De la punctura of veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The blood vessels of which flow commonly to be catheterized, the ones in the chest region are where pulsing veins are placed for probing and testing purposes; therein also lie herbs apparent on two pillars (likely referring to storage or preparation areas); springs contained within pairs of holes made by two hands named as aspicients; prepared vessels at the forehead location, as well as those in the extremity of the nose region; guides present along the neck column; and veins located under both lips on either side.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	May the veins that have been punctured in the arms be dry; from those is one cephalic (head), and it must heal with wild herbs; this people call it "the vein of all limbs," and the domesticated plant they name for its use as a medicinal remedy. It's also known by vulgar terms such as "belly vein." The arm veins are punctured above the hearth, in which case it is called this; that same venous channel where blood appears visibly during bleeding out; and sequester (hold back) its vessels—this one located between these two armpits.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	In the foot and calf there are three veins; one of these is that which follows the curvature of the popliteal artery from wild boar, and another is saphenous, located in the calf like its counterpart from domestic piglets; and the sciatic vein is also found here, following the pathway similar to that of the wild. Additionally, there are other vessels resembling these within this area.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The strength of the veins that are attached to the ears is ancient and migratory, causing ulcers and sores on the head bad by old times.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: For that which you must do according to me is thus—the head of malady should be cleaned with wool and large cloth in warm areas where blood vessels are numerous; tighten the neck with a bandage within so as to appear onions' leaves, two locations down from its peak. Inquire about this matter yourself, and if you feel pulsations therein through your tongue, here is how much force should be applied (implying that feeling pulsing sensation in one’thy own body indicates the amount of energy or heat involved).
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Take up the cautery lance now, which is already inserted, and insert that one into the vein within where the bladder (blood vessel) expels blood to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And lift your hand above the vein and artery, tracing them below where they enter these parts of the body.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	When the length of the intestine is equal to two fingers adjusted or enclosed by fluid, and it flows as much as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Return strength at the joints and let that which is healed remain therein.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And in the process of examination beforehand, there was an incision made for those and their subsequent cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	May the veins and arteries that supply blood to the temples weaken from ancient cruelty and excessive ointment use, as well as fluid accumulations at an unhealthy rate in the head' extraneous vessels are prone to embolization—a source of vexing pain.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And as for how you should perform those cuts, tighten your belly so that arteries appear within it when they come close together due to touch sensation, and this will show their pulses; and if only I could try.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Here comes the translation: Return to the thigh area of the malady and place your hand over the vein for an hour, placing pressure on that spot as well as others with cushions or pillows so that it heals strengthened by constriction.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And it is already followed by their memory recall and understanding, which are gathered in the common area of free will.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	So the venous flow of the facial vein is attributed to the cerebral venous drainage, and ancient head illnesses as well as groaning and putrid sores come into play here.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The quality of the surgery you are to perform is as I recommend, so that the thigh muscle becomes firm with one bandage appearing on its vein; and take up the instrument from which this form comes, namely:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the protruding point where it reaches the head of the foramen and strikes upon you as either leaned or another cause in your limbs, letting snake venipuncture follow according to what quantity you wish; apply that puncture wound inside the hernia so that healing occurs.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	When some bleeding occurs in the womb (uterus), but it is not as acute as other hemorrhages, and when a cauterization follows afterward on its own course due to weakness or fracture of bones undernethy pressure, then:
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	May the strength of the two veins in the eyes come from tears and sweat within these veins, and for facial illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	Here comes the line to translate: The quality of cauterization is that it tightens the sinew on its head with one bandage, and apply such treatment for you are standing over him/her.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	Even the surgery according to the crosswise along a long part of it is performed with small scalpels (fleubots), and not in flesh; if the surgeon performs delicately, then the patient's limb will be broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	May the bloodletting of the nasal vein confer fever and violent sweating, as well as facial illnesses and migradictions that cause pain in the face, mainly when old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of his lumbago is that it tightens and pulls on their nose with your left hand as you take out the catheter carefully undernethy' chest area where no vein will be felt, nor does the san commence to flow immediately here.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	When you finish your touch with the small finger and make it run along the second part according to necessity, applying that one on top for reinforcement, which then restores its elasticity again.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May the health brought about by cauterization of wounds guide contraction and resolution of lividity, leprosy, various diseases and painful ulcers with sores as they come along like a healing potion during hemorrhage.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return the vein at its length slowly, and remove it little by little as often required when you need to draw blood; likewise for another vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The soft puncturing of veins during flebectomy, alleviates small blisters and sores in the mouth and corruption of gums and bad ulcers inside and around the body.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	E the quality of that surgery which opens those joints in front of you and stiffens the neck with a bandage, while turning over the lips of him/her and observing both veins from where one is on the right side of his/her lip and another on the left; it's shown by either darkness for each of them or through their tiny black venous networks which may circulate within those vessels—thus you begin to inspect, examining closely.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	May you doubt it quickly and do not know which one of those is the cause, then consider what is most prominent among them and from their visible symptoms.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	When it appears that veins are present in the lips below (the text implies a condition related to blood flow or circulation issues), then...
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	May it be customary for some days to insert probes into the veins that are in the lower lip area.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	May the veins that come from behind your tongue be appropriately prepared for craniotomy at forehead locations in cases of tonsillitis and mouth diseases.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And as for how you proceed with those operations that follow within your body during sunlight, elevate their tongue and observe it from one vein of them downwards at another vein below, noticing when its color declines into blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And when a fever occurs in any one of them (the parts mentioned), be careful that your hand does not touch those vessels; soon afterward they will return to their place and restore the proper circulation thereof.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line as follows:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this determines how you join and connect these specialties according to the extent of veins and their narrowness.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of foot mortar made from myrrh:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Those veins are swollen and appear large carrying thickened blood; attend to those which contain hard deposits of cholesterol.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is how one performs lithotomy using an olive stone:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This small lithotomy tool is of lesser latitude and subtle extension; it's suitable for performing surgery on the delicate veins that contain fine chyle channels.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May the strength of phlebotomy on the basilica vein (which is one of three veins), extract diseases that come out from below and enter through the colon and belly, thus they will pull them away with it.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	E conveneys al surgeon conducting the bloodletting, when that person is performing it and maintains control over their fear therein, now they have opened an artery, and if mistakes are made during the puncture of the bleeder, insert that artery back into its place so that no more flow (of bad spirits or substances) occurs while you assist them with a linen cloth.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the basilica does not appear for obvious manifestation, then you should lay it there and change to another if necessary, or brace some part of your body that shows signs; wherein this area is examined at the end of the arm, which indicates its presence; afterward, perform surgery here with anesthesia as we have discussed.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	May you wish to perform the surgery on the patient's arm, then proceed downwards where your hands understand (the location of palms), and secure a bandage over their vein at its concave curve for bloodletting therapy; tightly bind the arm with this cord after which we have discussed. Be mindful to keep touch with these spaces around the artery's area within the limb during self-palpation (examination by feeling).
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you press and stretch the ligament there, it inflames at that place, and thus becomes swolthy due to an enlargement of the artery; therefore, this is what causes it here as well.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	If during the incision you see blood flow in conjunction with silver from a child's artery, pay attention that it is of arterial origin; and if your hand (the instrument) rests over this for long spaces, place your hand there as well—and if the bleeding stops by itself, be prepared to tighten your arm and lift up what has come out.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	Guard the womb of the patient's blood, and be over-concerned for it so that nothing harms them during the days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the sanction has not been detached, and if you do not present medicine to it now, then cut into the artery when needed; when its extremity is contracted, it will be torn off (like a cramp), and grasp that part firmly while moving down towards the site of constriction in the vein or ligament.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	When the sanction has detached itself (if so), then it is illness; otherwise, take care of that fluid from which the removed powder came to aid in remembering the location of the dispersed ashes/powders.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The difficulty of removing an obstruction in children is due to the small size of their bowels and limited elbow joint mobility.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	May the venous bleeding (from which we extracted blood) is conveniently done above and below the raised parts of the head and neck; hence it consists partly of branches from both the basilar artery and the cerebral artery, as we have mentioned.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If a vein is between two nerves, then draw out the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The extraction of blood from the jugular vein is to draw out the essence of the head and soothe the humors' illnesses.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	Here it is: In this particular place, if you wish to lance the veins with either a lancet made of olive or mirto; here they are safe from all veins and do not harm the artery nor nerve directly.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	May you therefore have to perform the procedure that protects it so as not to pierce through the head of the lancet too much, and place your finger on top where pricks are made, ensuring nothing is left behind if there's initial percussion over this area.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	May there be force applied externally on the patient's body where it is not yet probed with finger pressure, and then that same external application may reveal such an apatomy (abnormal bone or cartilage growth).
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	Must be considered in those conditions of the body where intervention is needed for correction:
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	Le first of the which you know that cauterization is not administers but for preservation of health and hope, as well as caution to prevent illnesses; it's performed in one of the veins found within the groin area – cephalica, femoral (fusca), and great saphenous (basilica); cauterization is done at meal time during breakfast and lunch, respectively, with consumption adjusted when signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	When it is time for cauterization with a lancet and after three hours have passed since the beginning of the day,
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	When bleeding is administered, it may be necessary at any time of day or night, always and forevermore.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	When one wishes to perform a blebectomy for any reason and keep the vessels from bursting during clyster lavage in those holes where they are retained, so that these ruptured fluids do not enter into the pustules of the bladders, which are purified by means thereof.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	E no they are not fistulae in patients' sacs or bellies; nor do they escape from illness within which their removal is considered appropriate for colic pain and vomiting, as well as issues of the abdomen and multiplicity of hernias and prolapses caused by exercise during breakfast times or vigils throughout all causes that dissolve their virtue.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	Consider carefully in the subtlety of humors since if the sanction is large from meats and drinks, or it's possible to direct them into water through medicine:
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	Return within the bath if any cause does not prevent it or due to some exercise for that matter, so that his body may become subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	When the bleeding from the patient is stopped in their chest, it's time to send for help as we have discussed.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And guard your chest today from all sorts of illness animals onset, when you feel anxiety, anger, fear, and bodily accidents such as pain or dislocation along with superfluous effort and excess weight carried by them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And in its cavity, there are causes present that it is customary for men to use fragrances and scents as well as balms and substances according to their quantity of possibilities.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the lancet maker over a cushion that has been placed there, or over one of those who are meant to be lancing-makers.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Here the arm is pulled out and rubbed with its lubricating substance, three times in this way; tightly bind the strap around that leg, applying those turns as well.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	When the swelling is early or excessive and not within the entrails of the sanctum (body), it shall be forbidden due to flux from the sick; otherwise, as for mollification, prevent movement in the body parts of the illness.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return (E aprop) the narrowing stricture (la strictura), which that person who underwent cauterization for ulcers had within them where their veins are swollen and have been diagnosed according to feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	Here is the translation of each line:
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	So, for that reason the surgeon must be prepared and active in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is lamed or swolthy, you will leave it for a day or two without straining the ligament, nor submerge it in water; quickly apply an apotemma (cast), which provides rest and immobilization to treat such conditions as described.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	Return (or restore) the incision with fingers if needed.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	If you discover it'spectively small and subtly shifting under the skin, fearing that its quantity will expand further, then perform cautery on this lesion at a second attempt in the corresponding area; once located therein by means of a minimal incision, whereby one can observe precisely. 
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	Mays if you see that already the apostle has been placed there, do not move it anymore on him, for no excuse shall be yours; pause above any opening of his wound wherefore the body may heal itself.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is better here than with other fats.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Here comes the sentence to translate: When performing an incision in the entire operation where veins must be prevented from becoming diseased arteries and gouty joints upon pausing at one of those above the location, it becomes subtle and turns when large.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If a great abscess is formed at the site of incision, it will be washed away by running waters (fluid drainage), mostly to where blood does not flow actively but rather slowly flows or in the vein'seperture, and if you apply pressure with your hand over that spot using a sponge soaked in saltwater solution, lightly scraped for an hour; then it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	When covering up the essence of that vein, it complements itself or another vein thereof.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If there is any darkness or greenishness in the place for a few days, do not touch it; if you wish to stop that which causes inflammation and pus dissolution (possibly syphilis or mercury treatment) or some cause of diarrhea from aloes or calamine oil resembling this substance, then pause over such a cause.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	E methodically apply pressure applied spinal taps and lumbar punctures of the base, respectively.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And rest your hand on that area, and if you must apply a heavy compress over it, be aware that this elevation is both evil and bad; therefore, keep in mind the cause for which we have mentioned herein, as blood flows strongly from the artery of life.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And when there is an ingot of water in which the puncture has been made, it hardens and then takes care that this other remedy be taken within its time for healing.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And when you extract from the sanction according to the quantity of its virtue and correspondingly with what comes out, then accordingly follows in sequence within the sanction.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the sanction is black, then you must insert it and ensure that when viewed closely, if it appears large, continue to insert until smallness prevails; similarly, should there be gout, maintain its heat treatment as necessary.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And for that person who is weak and in need of extraction on a day (veguada), the phlebotomy of the vein should be increased, as well as lithotomy surgery.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	In one who is feverish, its opposite occurs to that person, and what takes it out in guided movements, making it twitchy.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best that is administered through a venesection (flebectomy) should not be the cross section of the vein itself but rather its contents or some other aspect thereof:
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This incision for cauterization is saved from the flow of blood and nervous inflammation, and a good healing salt was applied according to prescription and duration.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If there is congestion of the complex (possibly referring to blood or fluids within tissue), then perform incision and drainage in an infusion bath made with myrrh oil, scented honey mixed with cloves, ginger, cinnamoman, and similitudes (or fragrant ointment that has a stimulating smell).
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If you experience syncope (fainting), it is caused by evil vapors from the mind of spirits, which exhale in breathing water and carrying fragrant aromas; use some essential oil on someone'dict body to apply their chest.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	When it is necessary due to these causes mentioned in Part II of dyspnea for expulsion, use the following measures:
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Whoever wants their arm and sanction dissolved after rest according to what is done from which cauterization occurs, perform it with a method of evacuation through burning (cauterization), whereby its fluid flows out gradually, as per the amount present in continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	May those who intend to affect their arms and shoulder blades, strengthen their chest thereafter following the first surgery for up to seven or nine hours afterward.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	May those who wish to pull the patient'sin hand away from where it was initially placed find that this occurs on the second or third day:
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	May this body part where healing has been begun and cut or split open cause fever; it is a wound that was created during the current period (or in one's time of illness) with large quantities, which amplifies within the place leading to fainting. Thus you will have maintained all conditions for surgical intervention on bleeding vessels; and placing your hand over his pulse located at this body part, preventing it from entering a state where he may die out in an area of collapse (faintness), which often happens when the surgeon is ignorant or negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	When you want to dislodge the arm and evacuate the bladder after a period of rest, once its valve has been oiled with venom blood flow, which is difficult part of the sank (bladder), press under that urgency forcefully and prevent it from extending further, as this would be too much.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Having the layser inserted internally; or remove any blood that has coagulated in the puncture site of the lancet within the vein, and place pressure on this area to prevent more bleeding from occurrdict.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If a vein is swolthy (or thrombosed), do not touch it there lest the clot becomes more solidified/aggravated.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If it is necessary for you to induce the bowels, there's no excuse; thus stimulate that part over there or in another vein as needed.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the referred "arm vein" is incised in the location of the dark or basilicus area when it's not lanced or pierced, which consists of those parts.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of this patient' extrication is that the malady introduces its essence into the tail region while being roasted, causing blood vessels to become visible.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	When it is necessary for the cautery to be firm on that limb affected by stricture or narrowing of the intestine, and applied transversely without being longitudinal nor lateral:
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	When your incision is wide, and it's through which you cauterize that specific joint area, here comes the line to translate:
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	If the flow of blood is prohibited, then repeatedly immerse in water until you complete your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the summer days, then you would be excused from bathing in the tail of the stream, and your body is rested on water' extrusion during pregnancy times.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The surgical opening of this vein is placed to ensure that none of the other veins are pulsing nor nerves present.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the incision of the vaginal mouth is provided for the diseases of the belly.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of the cauterization that you apply is to tighten or loosen your own ligament, placing it in an iron ring until the vein becomes swolthy and visible for demonstration; then perform transfixion thereof. If inserted completely, no other should touch it with water.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And keep your hand on the spleen, for soon as these nerves are stripped of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Apply it there in the tail end of water and let the blood flow smoothly at that place; if you do not apply there in the tail end of water, then the blood will clot in the vessel'dictor of vein, and is prohibited from flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	When extracting the vein according to necessity, pause over the artery and vein so that it is not congealed together; seemingly performing in all parts of the body at once.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	May the strength of that operation on her right side be for these illnesses of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	Even in foot surgery, it appears as if you have had similar experiences with other procedures.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The strength of the vein from phlebotomy is related to illnesses present in the lower parts of the body at that time, similar to menstrual diseases and retained menstruation, as well as ulcers and hernias on thighs and ancient cushions, resembling these ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	So apply antiseptic poultice or cushion to the affected area of the foot and ankle wound; it is better and more beneficial as a healing agent.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	If there are boils on the face of the body, take care to protect the nerves that come from those spots over the face of the body; pause your incision for what you wish to insert (perhaps a cure or treatment).
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	In translating this line by line into English while maintaining its original medieval medical context, here is what it could mean and
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	And if the intestine is bound by sanction, then wash your patient's leg in the tail end of their body and let the sincerity (presumably referring to waste or impurities that need cleansing) flow out while it is being evacuated. This directive suggests a treatment method involving water therapy for addressing an issue with blockage, likely within the context of medieval medicine where such practices were commonplace before modern surgical procedures existed.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the flounder-bathing practitioner makes a mistake during the first cleansing bath, then wash your patient in their feet; four times at each location where it is safe to do so—and need not fear patients' malevolence as you may protect yourself from our shared nerves. This line advises caution and further treatment by flounder-bath (a form of therapedictive bathing involving water or fluids) while also highlighting a concern for patient temperament, suggesting that the practitioners should be mindful both physically in their treatments and emotionally with regard to dealing with possibly difficult patients. It acknowledges
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly, it is said of the other foot'sinclination or posture. Here "sophena" may refer to a natural disposition (often interpreted as wisdom) inherent in another
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And concerning the vein of Sciatica, we have discussed it here; and you must lift your patient's heel downwards towards the forked limb (the left or right leg) on which pain is experienced—a technique perhaps aimed at relieving sciatic discomfort by adjusting position. This line suggests an understanding that certain body positions can alleviate symptoms
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The translation of this line from medieval medical Latin into English would be as follows: "And it is considered the fault of the thigh when performed en breech (in that manner)." Here, 'fleubotomia' refers to a surgical procedure involving an incision or cutting
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the "fleubotomy" (surgical incision) described here is that it involves a malignant humor between infiltrating into the body and causing festivity or inflammation ("festine") while strengthening the knee joint's tendon from below its thigh, within their shank. All done through an extended bandage undernethy (which may be interpreted as being applied to keep pressure on a certain area), which does not appear outwardly but serves other functions such as support or restraint ("quar no appar sino per aquo" suggests some purpose beyond mere visibility, possibly compression and immobilization).
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, apply the poultice there each time as you are able and according to the direction, which is better: insert that by injection or cut into pieces for application at those places, so that they remain in their location.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: She is in great pain; and if you treat that part, it won't affect her overall feeling, but what appears on both sides of the leg near the earlobe and little finger joints indicates this condition.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	Guard your nerves, and let the sanction flow as much as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Return and apply pressure over the location of the incision cut and tightened it up here where healing occurs.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	From windswept effects of those things.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Venous swellings, or bruises, or leeches come from here.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line as follows:
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This abrasion that is being scratched off is according to two types of scars; either it'sup or downward incisions are made.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	When applying the breeches (medical tools or techniques), incisions and extractions are made at twelve locations of the body, among which one where bleeding is stopped after pausing hemorrhages – that's partway down the head; above the junction between shoulders and neck - a place for inserting catheters used during surgery (pleural cavity); breeches applied to the mouth area just below the tongue, along with spatulas from two slender instruments inserted into orifices in skin – these are on facial areas involving lips; forceps of three beams employed at four insertion sites including those between ribs and sternum (thoracic cavity), also wrenching tools used to remove adhesions, over the area where fluid collects due to an accumulation or infection.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And extract the gallbladder only from the small, thin veins in the flesh; for that reason it is not extracted through these veins nor can one remove its function as long as all parts of the body are expelled (perhaps by cauterization). Nor should we consider the gallbladder a malady caused internally when there's repletion within, especially if done via phlebotomy.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	May it be necessary to provoke the wind by illness or continuous occurrence; administer that immediately at dinner time and in the evening, as well as during sex for any duration of time such may occur.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors:
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And when it occurs at any cause of them, and especially if on the third or fourth day after they have passed, command that a breeze be felt as pain passing through those hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	When the vitality of the head'thy wind is that when you carry it downward due to gravity into the chest, perhaps this allows complete evacuation from all parts of the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This inflammation is in the location of cranial trepanation (or skull surgery).
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not certain that one should employ them who are of complete humoral imbalance or in whose body there is clogging (catarrus), for they bring great harm to the patient.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	Through which means I use that for her joints and in the places where ill humors frequently flare up.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	May forgetfulness befall that person who is still over there (likely referring to the patient); and because you command the bellows operator to make their hand rest briefly on one of the bellows plates with a small touch, they fear loss of memory.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	May windward from the lungs is in the location of phlebotomy for the black vein and basilica: hence conferring on asthma, constriction of throat and sternum cracking (fractures), coughs, and pleurisy.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	When a small vessel is inflamed and rested briefly, it weakens both the body and the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	E the warmth of alchemy confers upon headaches and obtrusions (possibly referring to varicose veins or swelling), they migrate, are directed towards, and cause pain in the gums; this is where bleeding from the mouth takes place.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	When you command the suction device not to press on your hand so that it does not injure an artery and cause blood flow interruption,
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	When the wind causes discomfort in the chin and corrupts the gums, giving a semblance of illnesses present within the mouth, they appear to be located at sites suitable for dental extraction (tooth removal).
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	May the windy condition that is felt on the hips confer to well-being, which is through refilling with warmth.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	E the ventosa of dissected parts from the focuses provides good suction for phlebotomy of three veins, namely basilic, femoral and cephalic; that is where all those fingers placed into these thin vessels lead to reach the thickness of other larger veins so they can be connected during venipuncture.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	When commanded, do not proceed with incision in the act of cutting, for where flesh has been removed, immediately cease and stop your hand from touching nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is through this wind that moves over the lungs and conveys to the abdominal hernias and putrid ulcers of late,
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	When you command the windlass to create a great suction and it is of earth, then into strong cavities where there are severe inflammations, introduce subtle vibrating air movements and perform an incision with incisions (or small cuts).
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	May the small breezes from the cushions manifest slowly throughout the body and soothe old pains of rheumatism and menstruation in both breasts (and uterus), stimulate menses flow, cause discomfort to hips and belly button, staying at sites suitable for abdominal surgery or laparotomy.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	Despite all efforts applied to the body, fainting occurs in some people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	From these breezes it is better for health that one obtains vitality from the same breath of those cushions on their legs, and another'dictates: (The implication here seems to be about balancing or enhancing energy through fresh air).
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	Ne stops infiltrating and continues inside until he sees the place already turning red and swolthy, and appears displeasure (suffering).
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And when you scrape and suck repeatedly between two fingers at a time, pay attention to the disposition of the limbs.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	When that body is of tender meat with few bones and you do not scald it or press upon it, so that the place does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	When commanded by the bellowsman, increase the incision and raise a poultice, always keeping it easy to remove.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	If the sanction is swolthy and you need to scrape it with gentle strokes, then in the first washing of the body such actions are taken for purification (refinement) of both the bladder and its humors.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	May in the second act of acquiring knowledge about the removal of the large stone.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	If the sanction is caused by excrement, then it'se appropriate to perform a surgical incision on the smooth part so that healing may continue.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And at last, when we intend to extract small amounts of blood from either joint or foot with just one incision needed for us, this suffices as an operation.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	If we wish to extract a sick humor (disease), then scrape it off with the instrument of scraping; and if the patient'sinundice is thick, let us scrape foreward first before proceeding further.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The term for cauterization in which only the depth of the tongue is concerned.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the intestine is thick, hard, blackened, and its pores are scattered open so that the ventouses' surfaces become softened, lubricated; if it is summer time, then with aloe oil or wine vinegar, honey from beehives, thyme oil of cooking chickens, or sage oil for these resemblings.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the excess is heavy and quicksilver, then apply honey, or balm of St. John'dicts, oil of Aloe, or wine vinegar; according to their appearance.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	May it be that the bellows is made of large pieces of tendon, and forbidden to oil them, as well as for these places where they are applied on their bodies with ventozes should have water washed over by leeches or freshwater frogs' blood, or cold water from a spring fed at dawn, similar in appearance.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And from which he gets moisture sickness, washes his breath with water derived from myrtle and sumac, or similar substances to them, directed towards these areas.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	From the one whose excesses are thickened and washed with vinegar or water of ash (like wine vinegar), which is made from majorana leaves, dried apricot kernels, pomegranate seeds, or walnut shells, and they resemble them.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	When the wind-chapped is protected from bathing; there are times when it should be administered with part of the bath for one or two hours, and also rest periods that must accompany caring for the wind-chapping:
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What should be done so that a patient with bloodletting before venesection is properly attended?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	When considering the patient' extrication: if his coler or excretory system is chilly and swollen with humidity, possibly due to cold drafts (wind) and excessive consumption of acetic acid vinegar, indigestion from greens and legumes, along with sweat and dewberry drinks;
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	When their meals are taken with wine and braised meat, as well as fresh foods in general, it resembles the patients' appearance.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	When it is windy or during bleeding and drinking, its consumption should be greater than food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	E when it is given in beer for some hours to chief homes alpharac or musc, so called "muscada," or artemisia during the windy season or following bloodletting/aposiophecy, so that the main body parts may become comfortable and pain cease; but not when it exacerbates that injury.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	May the wind-blown wounds be pauses placed on their feet and osteoarthritis (podagra), as well as hernias in the joints' locations and the abdomen, where these body parts do not suffer from cutaneous injuries.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	E no it is sought for because of that which binds the member, as when breathing with a ponderous cushion on the chest and navel during sickness caused by an overflow of phlegm from the throat'dict to the lungs; they use this so that the quick motion of air within the body dissolves, doing so also upon the stomach and umbilicus; thus it frequently reduces the size of the member and relieves pain which is due to such movement.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And they are stopped over the hollows where there is accumulation of fluid and thickened humors due to strong attachment of these fluids, thus purging them from their place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	When one is sitting upon the pelvis and breastbone, where winds circulate in those cavities.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These coughs are administered by sucking only, and some of them even with the help of fire from a focus (likely referring to applying heat).
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	When water draugthy (or remedies) are fully administered for diseases of the womb,
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And it is for that the wind becomes full and produces much phlegm, such as water alone or with some plants added to make it suitable for coughing up phlegm.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of administered wind: It is so the extent of two needles' points, as we have formed them; and the quantity of powder is the length of one palm; it lies in its place within him/her, where he circulates, the quantity of powder itself, which little amounts like a thorn when inserted into him.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Its pain is caused by excessive bile or thick choler from the gallbladthy and heavy liver stones that do not allow it to maintain its position on itself.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	Whenever it is necessary due to a crossing of arrows or iron at its focus (possibly referring to the positioning and heating for cauterization), then there will be no pause in keeping the flame lit directly over that area.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this is the great cause of that which we have recommended; and the little medicine for those diseases and states in which it is used.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	When liver and spleen bubbles are larger than those of youths and large limbs,
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of keeping this fire above the limb is to gradually light a candle wax with a flame from the lighter, and keep it there on top of the vein in the area where the inflammation occurs so that the heat can be applied immediately afterward without risking damage to the patient's malady.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	Based on the vocabuldictions and structures observed in this text which have some similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French languages:
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	May there be a bubbling apparatus used in the malady of bloating, containing water only (without transverse or disruptive elements), and administered solely to the limb without pause.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is how it goes: And this is its form: The more the wind increases, the better it becomes, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Capitol .xiviii. (Assuming "Capitol" refers to a
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	 When bloodletting is not administered to the hands but only where possible due to their small size and proximity to teeth and gums, or on bare flesh such as of the face when it resembles a limb; this refers to cases for which venesection (bloodletting) should be done with caution.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	The quality of using those bloodsucking creatures that are found in the waters under noses worldwide:
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cum son umplidas e caso.	When full (are) and case.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	If it is possible that air enters into a location (possibly referring to an opening or cavity), then one may draw relief in joy.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	If not, then wash and apply warm water there for some time, and the inflammation will subside (or reduce).
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the catheterization of the sanctum (surgical intervention in this context) is prolonged and blood residues appear, then dip a linen cloth into cold water quickly, and pause over within to prevent the remaining fluid from draining out.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the sanction grows, sprinkle over it sulphur three times crushed, or gravels and stones from their causes specific, then the sanction will descend; when these pebbles stick to the place where they are placed, that is when the sanction descends.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	When necessary, repetition of bloodletting, when possible changing those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If the bloodletting is prohibited from suspension, then it must be restrained at the most recent sanction or leave an arrow in place within where there has been bleeding; and keep them paused until I sense any new hemorrhage.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	When you wish for a poultice on those areas, scatter a little powder of Aloe or salt and place it there immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	After starting from the tender division: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is often necessary in the practice of medicine; it concerns the restoration and treatment for bone fractures and displacements.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh child, know that the doctors and barbers here boast of this chapter, and those who at times did not regard as free from ignorance nor read these letters themselves antique or ancient ones.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	For this reason the science of these learned men is excluded here; and it has never been forgotten for any time since; nor have I applied anything else afterward except what was read in ancient books by free thinkers, from which I extracted the knowledge.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	Return (or adjust) instruments for experiments and study throughout my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English:
Capitol primier.	Capital first part or beginning (Note: This translation is an approximation as
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summaries and collections from the essence of bone fracture, which are required before we begin to recall the details of each broken bone and its various parts (Note: This translation is an approximation as it attempts to convey a medical text related to treating or understanding skeletal injuries. The original Latin sentences appear complex due to their structure but aimed at summarizing necessary actions for handling fractures).
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Cover then, in the introduction of this chapter, we present the essence of our speech; and these chapters are understood by craftsmen and skilled workers who stand upon knowledge and truth about such arts beyond their own. Here it means that initially, within a specific section or introductthy at the start of the book (chapter), key ideas will be shared for readers to understand better—especially targeting those with practical experience in related fields._
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And so it is said that when you experience a bone fracture or dislocation or twisting injury, then take care of yourself with an incision if no cause prevents this, to treat wounds as needed, whether the injury itself inflicts pain (fracture/dislocation), makes one weakened and decrepit, or occurs during intense cold or heat.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	Here comes the first source sentence: Return its content in lean meat of herbs and young animals' flesh; exclude heavy meats from it, adding only tender foods that fill blood vessels within the vein, provided you serve with caution for apendicitis treatment to avoid effusion into a limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	Whenever it returns to its original place within itself for which customarily belongs,
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	So when the bone breaks begins to be repaified, then it is necessary that you feed him with nutritious foods rich in substance and heavy (denoting nourishing elements), such as wheaten flours cooked in water, rice, legumes like lentils or chickpeas, fresh cheese from cows' bellies, milk, tender meats of pigs, young goat meat, large grains for them, and honey. In this way, coagulation occurs to heal the fracture limb by limb (implying bone repair).
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	Be aware that bones crack when they are in the bodies of young and weak individuals; it is impossible for them to remain continuous and solid as dictated by their nature due to drying out (exsuccation).
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	E become and continue according to their nature for as long as necessary for the removal of those limbs, just like how bones in small infants do (grow).
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Nature always adjusts and binds over the fractured bones of any part broken by something resembling dough thickness inside which you attach and conglutinate your ensemble, within that cause from whose poison or forceful contraction nothing is forbidden for those performing their tasks.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	For this reason it is necessary that we pause the foods of malady (which bear weight and consistency), as we have mentioned.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Motor variety according to the part of the body'dicts a range of bone breaks that vary based on which segment of the body is affected.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	Be aware that the types of bone fractures are various according to the variety among body parts, and a fracture in the knee joint is different from a fracture in the skull; similarly, a fracture in the chest differs from one in the pelvis. Thus, all other members seem varied amongst themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	When it is time for memory of all kinds of breakage, expressed in its own chapter distinct from the other:
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Motion various kinds of fracture in themselves (or within them).
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	When all is said about their own distress in the recovery phase after they will remember it differently at their respective places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Motive for bone breakage.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	For the sake of this translation task given the mix of languages and archaic terms used in a medieval medical context, I'll interpret the text as close to modern English while retaining some original phrasing where necessary for authenticity:
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	So when there is neither twisted appearance nor bone breakage upon touching the joint and thigh without inflicting great pain on them, here it'thy not broken or dislocated (translation line by line):
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	Have it possible that there is twisting or small fissure, which you must cover with your hand and compression for all of them; have pause over this area where the remedy comes to mind from when they were needed at that moment; hold tightly by slight constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	Here is the line by line translation of the medieval medical text:
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If an apothecary' extricates, then they should attend to it for as many days until the extraction ceases; and afterwards apply that which you can elevate or engage with each movement of your hands.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	Because you understand that I have placed a ligament or bandage on the area where it has been injured, so much better than if left with bone pain in which one suffers greatly.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Return strength to that part which will come back as memory of it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If the bone is satagated (inflamed), it becomes necessary to extend this broken limb part, whether it's leg or arm; or if the body itself feels tightened in its current position; use your hand accordingly: if it belongs to a small member, apply pressure here with your hand; or if it concerns tendons and/dictates that you place your hands on them.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	Here is the line-by-line translation into English:
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation:
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Excessive extension and compression, as the masters of medicine have observed to frequently occur due to their movements during treatment, or can happen within the limb where they feel water passing through after performing their actions.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Here is the line by line translation:
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	Here comes the sentence to translate: And as for the quality of a relaxed limb' extrinsic condition, you understand that body parts are various in size and shape among them.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	From those who are small of stature with arms and the flame (presumably a candle or other source), as they resemble them to these individuals; it is fitting that their covering be made from a thin, delicate cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	May those who are thick with the thigh or couch, a cover that is tight and hard around them so that their belly connects firmly with any extremity of the body through its narrow passage, preventing movement in it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Here begins the treatment, apply pressure to your bowel evacuation as needed, pause at a suitable place on the location of that fracture three times or fourfold according to what part is necessary in this member; and tighten your bandage slightly around the suture (ligament).
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Return the splint to its upper position on the site of the fracture, and hold it tightly so that your constriction does not loosen at this location where you have secured the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Here the bone is lengthened within the location of the fracture using an instrument or bandage gradually, until some portion takes it away from that place.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return your hand pressure over this other bandage, and ensure proper placement of these wrappings without causing infection or suppuration if present at all herein. Apply it daily until healed; also keep yourself firm upon its application on those bandsages.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	These are the thorns of hemp cane, and formed carefully; or they may be made from wood, or palm fronds. The form and figure of each thorn according to this shape and size:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	Empero if the pillar that is placed over the fracture is large and a small one has been added to the other supports, according to its length in both greatness and little as it reaches the body part mentioned earlier; and cover these beams with another bandage following your initial constriction method; this should correspond exactly to where the fixation for the fracture lies, and as you extend from the point of injury, so too will your restriction increase.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	Where the threads are thick and thin in texture, and they come from him; if these sinews are large, then he has seen them withdthy hands during their operation of stretching out his tendons like strings on a loom, it is great error when this tightness comes to equality.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: "And if it is necessary for subtle threads not to be conveniently connected with those waters you wish to contain them within their space and when there'seven days between stones of a single,
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	If the waist is led through the extremities of the legs to create a tightness in those places, delay for some time placing either a piece of soft or woolen cloth inside where it will not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some wounds are soft and there is a rupture in the spine; hence you will remember it here at this second particularity of the capital section.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	E understand that when all limbs are broken on the first day; this causes the limb to worsen if you do not rest it here for seven days or more as per your knowledge of contagious ulcer healing timing.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is how medieval physicians treated the injuries for which they are known: those related to breaks and displacements as well as twisting.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Manipulation of the cast after cooling from a broken bone repair is convenient mainly for complex movements and mostly in the legs and feet; it's that we use powdered talc, and the grain of flour propels movement within the grooves of the molar.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	When you comfort him in this way, but if that same book of humors is agitated and the comfort provided does not become soft nor subtle, then use it as such.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Other manifestations of placement fracture and dislocation and twisting: recipe for asafetida, lapidanum, acacia, enula, and mint, which is ground from millet grains gathered by all men; also myrrh and aloe planted by the serpent dragon. I; myrrh and aloe again, II times each; whole thirty spices and crumbs either in water or albumen if the complexity of the malady'0se is reduced; apply this remedy for good composition and restore broken bones healingly.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Other healing by pressing the following remedies: mix grain of white honey and dragon' extrices, myrrh from dragon essence, cinnamon powder (acacia) in six parts; black frankincense also known as Dragon. xx.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All have been ground in a mortar and crushed into pills or taken from water or an album of herbs and administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate line by line into English:
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	In this cast (cast), there is not restoration of health; it serves as a poultice that directly removes pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Other kinds of plaster that restore the cuts: hazoe willow branch shoots and poppy seed pomace; mix them all together for this purpose.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Manipulation of the plaster applied for bone fracture restoration and when you wish to resolve osteomyelitis: a recipe with althea leaves, cloves, violin flowers, flour from hemp seeds, all parts divided into three; grind them together and form tablets if the limb has not been cut.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is cut, then comfort that wound with either water from the colon (likely meaning a saline solution) or this same liquid and apply as needed for healing.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Autre application of plaster poured in healing solution that this first one applied when the initial abscess has subsided: mixture of bone ash and wheat germ, honey, musk root, mint, violet flowers, chamomile blossoms; all are ground up and soaked respectively in spring water or soft rainwater according to the quality of the limb and rest period for coloration.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May Ypocras does not prescribe a free that is resting on the affected limb for its recovery, but rather medicines of wax and oil, nor any other cause; he recommends moving between coarseness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May Guido have seen that there are pauses on the broken part of him where he needs restoration and for causes in which his little intestines dry out due to warmth taken internally with myrrh, seeds, and substances recommended by them from those causes.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Manipulation of a dressing that relieves wound and pain: mixture from cheese, chicken skin or pigeon feathers, chopped and ground; crumbs and flour are added, forming plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	May the quantity according to which you tear and dislocate it be considered: if there is not pain or fever nor bone fracture from its place, then do not leave your work for days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	If you feel sharp or severe pain at the location, then bend over it in that hour and apply a plaster from there onwards.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the sentence to translate:
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	If you see that the abscess and swelling and pain and inflammation have already risdicted all accidents over him completely, and indigestion requiring bandaging and strictures, then repeat what you did with the patient beforehand on his whole body at once.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	If there is no injury to any of those causes we have mentioned, then do not remove them for three days or four or seven; and some measures may be taken hereafter as directed after the detachment of the injured part, until it heals firmly in place where placed.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	When adjusting in the tightness you may have nowhere more than at your initial stricture altogether and into the belly of what belongs to the malady, as soon as memory recalls it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	May if you again encounter the fracture site and dry it out may so much that not heals at all, know then that nourishment is forbidden to prevent this; therefore immerse that part in water daily for three days, apply a small poultice herein, through which nutrition enters the limb, resulting in its healing.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	May it be that when the bones are not yet restored to health since they were injured and until their natural curvature is healed—according to what we doctors practice, a grave mistake in our operations; moreover if water has expanded freely and strengthened them (the joints), then it would greatly increase their size.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	Yet they have not seen enough of it from among their peers, so it is reasonable that they do not apply it themselves.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Second part (Capitol secundus): When a bone breaks in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The spices of breaks are pains and their figures are various, the causes are distinct: from any break one might feel pain due to impact on an aperture, which allows said pressure into the cranium (the skull), thus entering inside it; when there is also an incision in the space that includes part of the bone, you cut through the flesh and this does not pass beyond the back of the head. This type of break spice is called "lifted absolute.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This fracture or that which has already penetrated the periosteum (the layer surrounding bone), either within the bone itself or on its surface; in these cases, it is either large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And when it is a case of bone breakage, it heals in the subtlety of the hair strand and for this reason such specific type of micro-fracture is called.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	Mostly it hurts in the bones of the joints when they are covered with phlegm as well (when there'thy chill),
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	So all these fractured bones are splinted together as with separate planks or beams.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	When all this humidity comes back into its place in his location.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And I have collected all these spices for detection concerning those and their attempts at flesh corruption that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	Specially found upon the bone, and it is restrained there, lying over it as if to tighten (as a splint), wherein appears a black fracture.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	May in the treatment of fracture consider comorbidities from humoral imbalance and if through these signs it indicates fear (anosmia), vomiting of colic, distension, loss of understanding, absence of reflexes, syncopes, acute fever, examination and management of those fluids/voices related to the patient'dict symptoms in their major conditions. These issues do not lead to healing on themselves.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	If you witness an uncontrolled event (accident or misfortune), then you begin healing the patient.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	When the cause is that evil has entered your body through meals during rainy days of the twelfthy day in its entire arrangement within the bone structure, then take care as you study it from below the knee throughout the duration of this twenty-fourth day.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	If it is in the summer days, when you press your knees against each other during the day, they may have their pancreas rotten due to moisture accumulation and suffer from complications as recommended.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	If the fracture has already reached the brain covering (the pia mater), and it consists of small fragments and friable matter, then cover with fine particles as recommended by you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	When you lift the patient' extruded hump (which may indicate hernia or edema), and examine over their bones as per usual practice according to what is observed in a child, so that they become aware of it outside the body.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	If you painfully detect the bone, apply sanction or purifying cauterization immediately and stand beside it with water that covers, to allow rest for the inflamed area, ensuring security against fluid discharge of pus; begin treatment at the site of injury and incisions.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And it is either one of two methods for operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	One of the maneuvers is that you insert one instrument into each other so deeply as to touch them with their sharp ends. This is how it should be done: Insert another similar but smaller implement for this purpose, and similarly here too; this also forms part of the technique.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	When appropriate medicine is applied with forceps that have just been cleaned for use as the second instrument,
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	When using them for gentle tapping on the joints, in order that they do not hit their head and guide it thusly.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bone is strong and hard, then when you penetrate within its course before administering injections at the sites (which are called injection points), these puncture sites do not go deep into the body.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is convenient that you grasp these large jugs as many as each one agrees to the precision of any particular bone'dictum in your head wherein its sharpness exists, and quantity according to this preciseness both long and short terms shall be so accordingly determined.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And where you maintain total caution that the incision does not touch any cause of cholera.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when the bone traverses its pathway and if it continues along this line within you (the body), extracting that substance from there which in liquid form is like cutting knives or swords inside your bones, even so these may be powerful as chisels but are also gentle enough not to harm other structures.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	If there is any part of the bones that are small and tender, take those which will make it easier for you to remove them from the joints; also care for these pins and waxes (used in treatments) as needed.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other aspect of the operation is faint-hearted and out of fear, which Gualia and Laze work for great praise; this is their speech. It's necessary for you in your attendance to discover where the bone fracture was forcefully placed and made evident, stopping momentarily upon finding that specific part with a slow and cheerful movement typical of these individuals:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: For there is no cause in that lunate portion [joint], and its sharp (aggressive) division occurs twice beforehand, as it does now; thus, align this lunate joint with the face of that aggressively divided part within the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If any cause is associated with the patient'dict chest bone in specific locations of their ribs, insert that piece into its extreme end at the incision site and release it therewith, for once released from under him/her body, he/she will be harmed and afraid.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the bone does not penetrate within the periosteum, and where it has broken off or remains of the bone is its face, marked by roughness and small grains, then take care that you remove such roughness and eliminate those fine granules as per what you have prepared in various quantities so that at any place suitable for them to be administers (inserted), placing it right next to where your operation has occurred on the broken bone.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	When you administer in your ratio as for which the bones come to communion with those reasons, and use of its subtle essence undernethy therefrom; do not cease until reaching whereby one may manage all that putrid pus herein, both gross and subtle.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	May there be any small cracks or breaks in the vessels and subtle ones as well; administer care accordingly to what you have lost for correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	It is because not all have been cured of those things they studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	When we have shown large breaks in it (the object being referred to),
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	If the pancreas is inflamed when you remove the bone, then wrap that part with cloth as much as there is pus, immerse it in olive oil and rest it over the wound; and take another double or triple layer of fabric soaked in olive oil and place it on top of what's already covered, ensuring no further damage occurs to what you treat. Apply treatment with that underlying sinew only as much flesh there is left undernethythe patient will not be strained; do this until all the pus has been extracted from your application site.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	Here comes the first source sentence: "E es que tu fasses de aquestes medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plaga, ayssi cum son secas; universalmente, administra en aquel tota medicine of property that you abstain from biting and suckling.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Here is the line-by extratced translation:
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	When there is pain in the chest and bone structure becomes prominent as you administer care to it; then consider whether these accidents are part of its whole being affected.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If you do not cure blackness but through medicine that is applied below it (underneess), and this treatment of the blackness, then take honey in parts and olive oil also cut into thirds; apply these to the lines thereon a cloth, and place above those folds/cuffs, ensuring its application over that area so as they may heal. Also ensure it is applied with medicinal herbs for which you believe are necessary inside for their curative properties (healing).
Capitol .iii.	Capitol III. (The Roman numeral "III." signifies
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	When your nose is broken and cracked open, here's how to handle it:
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You understand that it is not broken from the nose but cut into pieces placed together side by sides, some of which are made according to cartilaginous bones; these parts do not break and become crooked or twisted inwardly nor fracture within you due only to arrogance and tortuosity.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the bones breaks and you insert a small object into its nose (presumably as an impromptthy makeshift splint), secure it tightly with what is indicated by your hand, until back in place following its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	If it is fluid for your ease and make sure you do not harm the groin area during that operation of yours on their thighs.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the upper chest portion of the body and does not go to that place, then cover it with a large piece from where the bone ends or splintered off at this joint.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the bone is broken into parts, then you make it seem like this (referring back to something previously mentioned in context).
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	When the bruise is restored on the first day of injury, if possible; otherwise, apply the seventh or octave rest periods for recovery from the application of caustic measures.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Return the instrument into the extremity of the nose a cloth from him, if the break is in one piece, or metal nails for breaks in bones, and such heavy weight that it doubles the displacement of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	Here comes the medieval medical treatise for translation:
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Here are the translations line by line:
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause is not necessary for you; if you wish, then perform this action, and if desired furthermore apply cold compressions.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	If you apply a caustic poultice externally with charcoal or linseed paste mixed in oil and vinegar, or with lime juice (medically known as "diaquinol"), do so carefully to treat an open wound.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If you have not yet treated the abscess with caution, then heat that part of it which is affected by barley flour and honey paste applied to almond powder; place your hand over its stop (the swelling), ensuring there'thy no cause for pain.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	May if the bones of the nose are broken or compressed, break them over those areas and extract with instruments that you find appropriate for these; fix the fracture using fluid (blood) that embodies it and strengthens it, as well as bandages suitable to its treatment.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If you crush worms inside the nose, then treat it with that which heals and apply bronze tubes within so that his whole body may be restored to health.
Capitol .iiii.	The provided text is written in what seems like an old or archaic form of
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	When the jawbone fractures, it typically requires medical attention which may include restorative procedures by a dental surgeon (oral and maxillofa
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone breaks and the break is not displaced entirely (not in two pieces), if it's only fractured without significant misalignment or deformation of segments ('dientes'), then its diagnosis should be less serious, possibly involving simpler treatment options rather than complex surgical repair.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the jawbone has already been broken into pieces, then it is necessary to administer extension of parts according to proper alignment so that healing can occur.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If you have caused concussion to the teeth and intend that they break apart due to mercury or silver (or gold), then apply pressure on the broken jawbone fragment, and place your hand over the double cloth drape; also place a single-handed pillow along the length of the jaw fragment. Apply this as long as you wear your attire and when applying it so that the device is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	Command the humors (body fluids) that cause rest and calmness, stopping the food from being absorbed by its passages (like intestines).
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If you have swelling in any manner of the body's shape, then tomorrow morning take care to rectify what has already been altered and place those items on top that day: bread or albumin from cow milk or flour of barley paste applied over woolen lint.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when that bandage is put on and adjusted over it, so as not to alter the position of the bone, let such be done only if healing occurs strong and complete; for this fracture will mend in three weeks' time.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If another complaint of purulent inflammation occurs, apply the treatment we have mentioned for these previous pains inside until it is healed and this abscess (aposteme) has disappeared.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is in bone (plagua refers to a young or immature state, which can imply broken due to weakness), consider whether it'thy displaced from its position within the osseous structure of that body part or if separated/dislocated. Then carefully reposition those dislodged parts back into their original place in accordance with what seems appropriate for restoration during recovery (remocio).
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the poultice applied is insufficient, then increase it according to your need at the foot surgery site.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	When you have finished those satagias and there is no more reabsorption from them, if the space they occupied was wide, then cover it with soil or dirt; otherwise, rest on one of the supports that were intended for this purpose to allow healing.
Capitol .v.	Capital Point or Part (The text is likely referring to an important point
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	When lifting, the shoulder blade (furcula) must be properly supported and not twisted:  
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Motions repeated lead to the breaking of the shoulder blade from its joint with the bone, and such a break is considered in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When it is broken, separated, or divided into parts that do not meet the standards of repair; and healing in these areas will be difficult if attempted at all; when there has been a fracture as though on the street.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	When the operation in that case occurs because of a fractured sternum being broken apart, it is necessary to have two servants present: one holding his hand and supporting the fractured sternum, while the other extends the chest where the break occurred.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return the bone in its cavity as it was shaped by nature, and ensure there is neither much prominency nor depth within.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If indigestion occurs from overextension, then rest periods of the malaute'supreme (likely referring to a specific organ or region) are desired with cloth or wool as padding according to your need; extend and raise the shoulder blade, compressing it within where you hold so that heals naturally.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you cannot lift the extremity of the shoulder to the parts beyond, it will come down towards the head because the humors have risdicted above its neck and rests on one leg at a joint in great size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The doctor presses on the muscle of him/her at the joints until the bone (of the shoulder blade) is raised above them, and once this position is achieved, he corrects the fracture with those tools.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel tightness of the shoulder and neck muscles, it is advisable to break them over that area and remove those tensions for ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If retained in the bone, then you will engage one of those instruments that have been prepared for this fluid (blood), placing it gently on the sternum' extricating what has accumulated there; and these tools are made from wood or iron.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It appears that the text is in Old Spanish or an early form of Romance languages influenced by Latin and possibly French due to its vocabulthy and structure. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	May the length of it be as much as is within your capacity for operation; that there may be two hands at disposal each time, one broad and the other tightened.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	If the disruption of the wound that you have incised when extracting the splinter is wide open and susceptible to infection, then tighten the wound edges with stitches immediately.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the rupture is slight, or you fear an abscess festering (which may require drainage), then apply bandages and poultices according to the quantity of the wound' extrudate.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If you apply a poultice made of vinegar and oil on it and let it sit there:
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	May the bone when it is weakened and swollen be bound with a paste made of flour mixed with egg white, placed on top over the spit used for roasting meat; bind that binding twice upon the splint and bandage; take hold of human hands in which they have been tied together so tightly that their joints are sore, making sure to adjust them properly before wrapping it around both items (the bone fracture and hand tie), placing a delicate tablet stand beneath from where its positioning is three fingers long and appears proportionately; wrap the binding in cloth which drapes over this entire setup on site of breakage. Securely bind human hands together as done for fixing, twist that knot so tight it holds firmness throughout all parts involved (fractured bone and hand tying), ensuring not to be concealed from sight; when the fracture in the affected area becomes stronger than before its weakening.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	Here is the line by line translation:
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Return the patient' extraluminal sleep (the state of resting with an indwelling catheter in place), and tap gently on them at intervals each night until a small bladder becomes full; thus, it elevates their helper hand to lift that very limb. If this causes discomfort or pain:
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	No pull the ligament unless it becomes rigid or inflamed within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: If you have seen the face of your patient into water, adjust in the narrowing and restore such that bone is healed and clotting occurs at the breastbone crack.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	Strict and compressed according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some signs appear on healthy individuals during that time of it.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol VI. (The numbering here likely refers to an order
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of shoulder bone fracture restoration." or "Regarding the treatment of a clavicle/scapula fracture
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula is broken at its lower end and not within the patient, but rather along its edges." This sentence appears to describe a situation where an object (in this case, presumably in a clinical or surgical context) has been damaged—a spatula specifically
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when it is broken in the molten (or heated) location of the patient — and not through normal contact, as explained by the fracture figure preparation for treatment— then you can only reduce that according to nature's way with all dexterity available." Here we have a situation where someone has sustained an injury possibly involving heat or some form of thermal energy. The context suggests they are dealing with bone manipulation, as indicated by the term "fracture figure preparation for treatment," which implies that medical personnel is attempting to align broken parts (in this case potentially fractured due to excessive force rather than a simple break).
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the chisel is concave in some places of the scalpel, then you grasp that indentation and press down with your palm to level it out, and adjust the blade accordingly for balance.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Once strengthened below, away from contraction and the hardness of bone within which it should not be returned to its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the ligament each day; and every time it is softened or stretched out on its stone if swolthy from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And lay the patient's limb upon themselves (or a support).
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The translation of this line from Latin-based medieval medical language into English would be as follows: "And in x days or in .xxv, it will have been restored." Here 'sp
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	Translated into English line by line: "And so when this number is completed," you will then break the ligament, and be sure that it does not worry or disintegrate from those bones which I began to mention at first did not cause fear nor dissolution." Here a numerical milestone in some form of treatment has been reached (likely referring to days), afterward requiring further action—in this case, handling the ligament associated with certain previously discussed bones. The text suggests that once complete, one must deal carefully and securely with
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	Translated into English line by line: "If you proceed to the area of pressure and pain in your neck, apply poultices made from herbs immediately upon arrival here," firstly treat it as previously stated concerning fracture at site where sternum has been broken due to a hardening condition. Here further instructions are given on how one should address specific symptoms - likely indicative of trauma or injury – using natural remedies, possibly poultices made from plants and herbs available in the immediate surrspective for home-based treatment as mentioned earlier. The text implies that swift intervention with these makeshift treatments may help heal a potentially serious condition involving broken sternum (stern
Capitol .vii.	Translated into English line by line: "In Chapter VII." Here, the
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Translation in full context to English would be: "Regarding the healing of a broken bone," indicating that subsequent content or discussion (presumably
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	Translated into English, the entire sentence reads: "The bone for some days has been broken and fragmented in this place of pain, or if its ends are crushed during movement." Here we have a description from ancient medical texts about dealing with fractured limbs. The passage indicates that over time (for 'some days'), one can expect the affected area to display bone breaks ('fragmented'). When moving around may cause further damage wherein parts of injured extremities, likely
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	When accidents happen and the patient's body parts are torn apart causing great pain in him/her and difficulty breathing, coughing up blood or vomiting it; these conditions become apparent when there is a fracture of the bone which becomes evident upon physical examination.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The restoration of him is that his spleen will be placed on top of the two legs; and a band between the shoulders he has one slipper in place; adjusting muscles where there are more than two pairs, bending backward as far as possible while staying within what can feasibly or conventionally done for this operation.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Here comes the translation line by line:
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If it is necessary to provoke a dismemberment of that which causes corruption or inflammation in the place you are addressing, and if there is pain, ulceration, or sores present due to illness treatment by yourself; then remove the imposture and correct what has caused such suffering. And reduce the imposture as necessary for its face (i.dict), ensuring that it fits precisely within where healing must occur.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.: (The translation is not provided in this format as
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	When beaches are broken up, it refers to a natural or man-made process where the coastal landform of sandy shores has been fragment
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	When the coast is fractured, it does not happen in large areas that span between two points; instead, these cracks occur due to fluid (water or humors) flowing through porous materials such as limestone bedrock which are prone to dissolution and create pathways for water. The extremities of their legs from the party indicate they might be witnesses or participants in this phenomenon rather than directly being affected by these fractures themselves, suggesting that human activity is separate from natural processes here.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	Upon learning of him/her not being afflicted by his thoughts which are under inquiry, I understand that there is relief or peace within them regarding this matter.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	The restoration is to be done as best possible according to the patient' extrication order and holding their bone fracture in place with splinting or strapping if required by that same person.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the fracture of the backbone is declining towards the divisions, it causes severe pain and puncturing sensation, similar to when one cries (indicating emotional distress), at which point you must put a blanket over them; they will also experience difficulty in breathing, coughing, vomiting phlegm, all of which indicates difficult treatment.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	Even then they work diligently in that moist place of necessity.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	From them that say: cover the foods of malady that bring inflammation and agitation, so that the stomach may swell and expand, and the fracture be pushed forward to its parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	May we consume it to prevent the cause of leg warts from arising if not already infected; and if indeed they are infected, this may help with the consumption.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: When their urine is stopped undernethy and when they drink sweet fluid; it seems like reasoning, but beware that weakness may draw these excess fluids upwards into the location.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And those who are ill, let them cover that place with wool soaked in oil and keep their pauses between the backbones until it is filled again; then treat gout at its cure for pleural effusion of food and medicine. 
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	If the groin (belly area) is strongly contracted and does not suffer, press it with a cushion through puncture wounds, fearing for the belly, whereby they will fracture over that location, pause there on the instrument which preserves life force or vitality from beforehand mentioned, facilitating their removal.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	Once we adjust the lips of flesh (if they are large), for comfort and treatment to heal that which is inside it.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If you have an abscess that has become inflamed (acididos), then apply pressure with warm oil and rest on the location to heal the abscess using what is poured atop it.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And lie upon his back over this bed so that he may be cured.
Capitol .ix.	The provided text appears fragmented with limited contextual clues for accurate translation
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	This line seems like a Latin phrase that could be related to medical treatment, possibly referring to the care of vertebrae in the lower back and neck (vertebral body). However, without
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	The given text appears to be an older or regional Latin medical term referring to the treatment of bone breaks in the neck and back (possibly vertebrae), as well as resembling those of the lower two thoracic vertebrae ("spondil duos"). It suggests that, after a fracture occurs along these areas:
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	When you have drained the humors to the armpits and veins and wish to know if it will heal or not, then consider that your masses may already be softened, stupefied, dead, and cannot maintain nor extend those moistures in them. When they are constricted by these needles (likely referring to cauterization tools), you feel no pain therein; thus, you know it is not healing. In matters of disposition, this condition is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	If those and feel pain in them with pressure or piercing, then you will know that the patient'thy bone is saved and humors are cured by it.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	If you see how the vertebrae of the back resemble water and wish to know if they will heal or not, then consider their condition in relation to his body weight.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If you find that your body is already softened, apply to those waters where it happens in the limbs and when on top of their two shoulders breathes windy gasps or acts upon its own desire, causing urination without control, understand that this being mortal, thus does not treat well.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	May it not be caused by any of those things; then its cause is better and clearer (to treat).
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The care for the patient is that you perform ablations with a cauterizing instrument stopped over the inflamed spinal column or fractured bone, on which rests several times throughout the day until the cauterization ceases to act; this applies when such action ends.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And when one of the cushions that provide comfort and exist, rests upon it, firmly holding onto its thread; command the humors to take a pause and tranquility, so they do not sleep in the part where pain is still suffering until healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If you have fractured the bone of the skull or any other cause that has already separated from it, then cover it with bandages over the spine and hold onto that bone; adjust the lips of wounds if large, suture them if necessary, and take care for those encased in bands until healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the lower part of the bone is broken, and it's the time for the cotyledon (the embryonic contribution to fetal tissue), then you insert your hand into its left side at the belly button area, and gently press on that portion which has been injured by pressure from elsewhere; apply gentle compression with bandages or plaster here if necessary. If unable to do so directly, place a cushion under it (the leg) first, then proceed as described above for support: provide soft padding followed by appropriate restraint and elevation of the affected limb(s).
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel crushed pieces in it (the body), touch that area and apply pressure to it, and heal the wound with care as has been done before until recovery is achieved.
Capitol .x.	Capitol .x. (This line does not contain enough contextual
De restauracio de la ancha.	The provided text appears to be in a Romance language, possibly Catalan or another dialect influenced by these
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the thick ones are broken, and if they break, their fracture is not just communication at those extremities; instead, these lengths stretch out into parts, descending to each section's joint – thus causing pain in that location where there has been a crack or penetration. When this occurs, shock (which could mean both physical trauma and emotional distress) overtakes the body part affected by fracture; furthermore, when bones break openly, astonishment ensues within those handling them – likely referring to medical professionals who witness such an injury.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The restoration of it is that you spread your hand over whatsothy be the figureof thou.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the bone is broken in only one limb of him, then take that second arm which he was born with and gently insert it into his body through clay-like engagement until its form naturally aligns with his figure again.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	May it be that if the fracture is long or already declining into parts immediately, then you shall speak to the malady within your abdomen while preparing for its restoration.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when it has been immobilized on the splint or bone, apply pressure over that beam, and be taut across the point where there is no fear of a crack being made for breaking or removal of the spine (implying treatment without risking further injury).
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And when that water inside fills up evenly in which that bubble is tightened by its strictness, command the hump (which may refer to a swelling or abnormal bulge) either on top of it where it rests upon their chest and backside, or undernethy thighs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	May you apply compression with bandaging (cautery), and cease exertion from it and its restoration until the application of pressure has calmed that injury down enough to stop further damage; then return things back to normal, applying strength during recovery as needed for those suffering before.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If you break down bones or they are fractured, then treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi. (The ".xi." notation here seems like
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Restauración de la fractura del auxiliar." - This translation suggests a focus on the healing of a bone fracture
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	 "Adjutori is located between the shoulders within the shoulder blade." - This translation clarifies that 'adjutori' refers to a specific anatomical structure, namely something situated in this area of the body: betwixt or nest
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	If it is broken, the repair of this thing (adjutori) must be done by one of these methods; which you grasp with a metal tongue according to its shape." - The translation here indicates that if 'adjutori' has fractured or been disrupted in some way, then healing should occur using specific techniques. These involve holding something possibly made from bone (using the phrase "fust pla de migiera groceza," which translates roughly to metal tongue and could refer to a surgical instrument) with
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	They are latched on two limb clasps, and they hang from the raised location." - This translation describes how certain devices or attachments (possibly used to stabilize 'adjutori' after surgery) operate: using clasp-like mechanisms attached at both extremities
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Follow the humors along one limb; and place your arm with a broken bone within that metal where it will connect to its tube, holding onto which allows for the proper curve of the tube." - Here, there seems to be an instruction involving following or monitoring bodily fluids (humors) through parts of the body related in some way ('limb'). This limb with a 'broken bone' is inserted into metalwork that may relate to medical devices such as tubes used for treatment. The mention of holding onto something suggests securing it, possibly after surgical insertion
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The other method is that the hernia rises onto the seat of the uterus and suspends its chain from below the neck, commanding two ministers (handles or tools) with their tongues to grasp it there; one grasps immediately above where they are located, while the other extends downwards towards them.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	If you wish to make the extension strong, then hold tightly over the fracture with one ligament and another, so that both of their divisions stretch outward.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then hold one pad on the wound and another immediately after applying the fracture to the groin area.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And if it is evident that the fracture belongs to the groin area, then make sure to pause and place the suture over that spot and on the thigh where the injury occurred.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If you cauterize the ulcer today, it will harden within a day and heal overnight covered with fine sutures waxed yesterday evening; similarly, apply that strength to your effort.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And for the arm fracture that is being immobilized with an external bandage on top of the plaster, and adjust your hand over it to prevent movement in the injured muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Pause the sheet and hold tightly on the assistant'supar to ensure that his arm remains in place and does not hinder due to any cause of bone fracture.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And when they use forceps (Note: The term "stelhas" refers here likely to medical instruments used for manip
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And when there is a fracture of that stone which has been laid and put down by others; pause between each one (of those stones), following the direction, whereby it'dicts how long each segment should be according to the overall division into three equal parts.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Return strength above the bones where I have mentioned as constriction in the context of this discussion with you today, doctor.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	It is that your tightness at the site of the fracture has become loose (or set).
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	When I have elongated the fracture and reduced its spasm (smaller restriction),
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	Therefore, if you see the situation of the joints and their restriction as we discussed earlier in this hour when restoring the limb to its state, then do so accordingly.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	If you fear scab formation, then tomorrow within seven days (time frame), attend to the stricture and stones as we have discussed.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Adjust the ligament in all parts for three days so that it does not happen unexpectedly or inflammation, and thus correct everything as we have discussed.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	May if you are standing on an understanding that there is no cause for this matter, then do not release the bandage until three days have passed or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And his sleep in the thighs is on top of their two (these being) legs and their hands are over their belly.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	Pause over the cooking assistant clothed in wool entirely, and consider at all times of day or night whether the broken member' extricated piece is not dissolved nor disintegrating; therefore correct what you must according to your intention.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	Here comes the sentence to translate: After their meal according to the order of our times, so that food is subtle within digestion until it has been consumed in conjunction with dinner; and when heavy food arrives for them.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	According to custom of the assistant and the cloth applied on them, they should be strong for forty days; furthermore, when they are weakened, apply oil washing and wax ointments which correct it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	If the bone is set in place of friction, do not remove that very bandage and pins within days or even two months.
Capitol .xii.	The provided text is difficult due to its archaic language structure which blends elements
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	In English, this phrase related to the treatment of a broken arm would translate roughly as: "Treatment for the
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	When translating this medieval medical text concerning the treatment of a broken arm (which I've interpreted to be in Old Occitan based on language use), we get:
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	When either the great or small fire is broken only once, and thus their joints are injured (injured due to bone fracture),
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	When the small fire below is broken, then restoration and healing of him will be easier (safer/more likely).
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	When the fire of it breaks down at times, its bone is bad, and healing for it becomes difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	When that thorn from it came when they were broken into two pieces.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Then if the bone that has been broken is the little under-hand one (likely referring to a small or minor fracture in the hand), it's convenient for the doctor, and you need its restoration which will be done quickly until this moment when said person can use their hands again.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	May it be that if a great fire is what ignites him/her upon being struck, then he/she immediately extends forcefully with his/her hand.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	If the two flames join together, then when you pause their withdrawal motion with force.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	When the figure of the hand must be restrained and extended over a pillow, place it on their legs' parts; put your hands there as well (and thus include all others too), positioning the earlobes at the base of these other points, with the head centered on a lowered cushion.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And when a hernia is present under or beyond them (the thighs/pelvis area), to prevent the malady from worsening.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	When one minister extends the arm of the party placed downwards or upwards like rope (the limb), and another similarly raises his hand above the head, here begins their duty as aides to each other in treatment actions.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Engage the doctor'dict bone within that contracts it as closely as possible according to its better form.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	If in the bone fracture you find swelling throughout the entire body at your location, it is within your power there.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	If there appears in you separate pain that pierces the navel and is not within your hope for recovery, then upon it act according to our instructions as directed below:
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	May if the bone is broken and bleeds profusely (singularly), then take care of that wound immediately.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If you harden the plaster cast applied to your restoration, then take waxed linen strips dipped in olive oil and white wax, respectively, weave them between stiffness and subtlety; drape it over that area where the sprain is tightened until the splint gives way. Then remove the wax and apply a poultice made of powdered flower from chamomile boiled in honey mixed with crushed chalk, place pressure on this point above which there was placed afterward due to fracture; here lies that stone stopped by placing it where broken bone has been set.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	Even know that the name of bones in the arm is found within its major arrangements or a fracture at one focus point or two points simultaneously occurrthy (assuming possible translation errors due to archaic language and limited context). Here, 'stelas' likely refers to 'bones,' 'bras' means 'arms,' 'majors disposiciones' can be translated as 'major arrangements/structures of
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And when you apply pressure firmly on the location of the fracture and also release it vigorously, if afterward the constriction moves beyond the parts above or below the fractured bone segments, then loosen the tightness gradually as soon as its remembrance in your conscious mind occurs during meditation. Here 'pausa la strictura' means to relieve or release the tightness/constriction; 'le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement' indicates strong and forceful pressure applied on the site of the break, suggesting immediate aftercare for a fresh injury might be expected in this context. Moreover, ‘mays sira’ could translate to perhaps or may even loosen which suggests uncertainty about how much constriction movement is normal post-injury; 'partidas desus de la fractura' refers to the parts above (probably indicating bones that
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the bandages that cover the fracture are soft and not hard or constricting; this particular fabric is what you should choose to move between fine (light) texture as advised by our healers/doctors, suggesting a preference for softer materials in wound dressings which aligns with traditional holistic approaches of gentle care. Here 'draps sian draps mols humitz' indicates soft cloth wrappings used on the fracture; they are not hard or tight ('no sono duri ni aspres'), and their purpose is to provide comfort without causing additional constriction - an important consideration in wound management where dressings should facil
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the limb as well-nourished today.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	If there is any cause that requires rectification, attend to it on the affected limb immediately and make sure that bleeding stops within which allows for the stop of said hemorrhage.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Le text provided appears as though it is an amalgamation of Latin with elements reminiscent of Italian and French linguistic structures due to its historical context in medieval Europe where multiple languages intersected through scholarship and trade. Here's a line-by
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the constriction is softened and bone seems to flow back into place in relation to them, then correct all of it according to your judgment as a healer.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Consider if the nourishment is prohibited to prevent harming the body part due to excessive tightness; when that occurs, soften it slightly and strengthen it during the days until such time as this essential nutrition returns.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	May if there is no cause for that which we have stated in them about the malady above mentioned, do not attempt to heal it within twenty days or beyond those assigned by us.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	Return its pillow from the waist for its active motion disposition and let it sleep on its own two legs.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	Be aware that this fracture will be healed in either xxx days or xxxii days, and at most in xxviii days, all according to the complexity of the injury and the disposition of the patient'se body.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii.: This line appears to be referencing a specific section or
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	The restoration of the thumb joint and fingers:
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You understand that with the finger on my hand and from our union of love, you do not harm them but guide their movements gently day after day.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	When you have the patient'thy fracture or dislocation here comes to follow that their humors deviate and lie down by this center secondly equally, place your hand on it over the extended area.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Return (arrive) the minister extends the broken bones and, as directed by the doctor, places them in their natural joint connection where they belong.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	Even if you apply plaster and bandage without curing the ulcer immediately, place padding beneath according to the size of the wound area, which you have already wrapped in cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	May it be that the bruise is in the parts of defeat and appears as cloth drape, and order the patient to tighten (or strengthen) this area with their hand on its bruised part; make sure the bandage/cloth wrap long enough.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And if it is necessary for the body (the corpus) to be wrapped in cloth whereby it rests on the palm of the hand, then tightly bind that second layer around it so that the body remains supported by the hands.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	May it be that if the fracture is at the exterior parts, then you should pause below and above stone fragments of the part affected immediately after touching them with your hand so that the wound becomes covered (protected) and healed quickly; also apply pressure to stop the swelling until when you have turned over its position between the muscles as directed.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If you break the bones of your fingers, and it' extruded from its place (fracture), then apply pressure on top of them with a small stone held in your palm; if you wish to do so: pause for three days until the fracture is raised and not swollen.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	May it be so if the fracture is in those other places as well where heat was applied (in that spot), or on the indication point, or at the auricular (ear) point, or on the anular (wrist crease) point; and should they all continue to heal simultaneously, better than them being stopped over there – similar to what we did here with our touch.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	Consider when performing restoration, and position that which is applied externally for aplication or opposition – as in the act of treating this condition - according to how it has been described hereinabove.
Capitol .xiv.	Captain XIV. (This seems like an excerpt title or reference
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Regarding the treatment of a hip fracture.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the thigh are worn down and it is declared according to what has converted them into an upper, sitting posture.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration of him is done so that the sinew tightens over the fracture and another bandage immediately afterward, with the hump lying on his abdomen and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Whenever necessary, extend the minister (doctor) fully according to the quality of bone where the fracture is located in the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it is necessary for the ligament to be close to the bone at the joint' extrinsic boundary, place it on the tendon of the limb, and thus prevent extension in those areas; while another bandage also comes immediately after the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	If the joint is predisposed to inflammation, then it will have pain and swelling in the parts just mentioned.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Here the doctor enwraps one of their own limbs inside until it is reduced according to its natural shape and normal joint connection; as long as there are contractures or shortening present that do not affect the affected member (patient).
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	May you if there is an ulceration present, then apply that for several days until the ulcer heals itself, and return to your care routine.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The contracture of him is painful: covering that overlays the fracture with hard bandage, and folding it twice or three times for some days to reduce excess; then wrapping again the compression within so that reaches up to the ankle and back of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	Here insert a long strap between the thigh and waist belt provided by the dress as needed at various parts of the body, and tighten these extremities with it once there is excess from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Return pressure over the area of that fracture and place some support above the bone in the leg region where there is a stone (fracture), holding hands to maintain stability or positioning:
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Return the empty spaces between the sheets under the thighs and couches to ensure that bleeding is stopped.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Here begins the cautery at the stiff spot of inflammation above the place of breakage, and as you move away from the location of the breakage, your rigidity decreases, so apply less force and introduce moisture.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return their limbs' extremities towards the parts where they enter until reaching the cavity of the foot, and tighten them with the lashes of the other part so that it does not stray from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Here comes the translation line by line:
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If there is pressure on the bone of which you have placed it, then gently insert that second one if possible; otherwise, apply force to it and heal with what was remembered before as long as they are sick.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And in some cases this pelvic fracture is also accompanied by spasms which occur alongside the splints we have discussed earlier in our assistance with the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	Even in the process of restoration like this, you will not cure the locked thigh movement; and if it is restored alone, another should be applied on top as well, making it necessary for them to limp that very leg which has been subjected to heat or cold.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	E understand that the thigh is tense in forty days or a few months and all this depends on the variety of complexes and other dispositions (of humors).
Capitol .xv.	Capitol XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Restoration of the dislocation of the shoulder joint.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Understand that a dislocated kneecap may be purged with frequent movements.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If you have caused the patient harm leading to what seems like a break or disruption in their parts, it is only considered as an injury or trauma of some kind within them, and this has affected everyone'dictively (emphatically).
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of the patient is to be done by applying warm water that has been broken up from within, so as to bring together and conjoin according to what can feasibly occur for recovery through motion and ease of construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Return pressure or tightness on that round stone if you find it uncomthy, and strength from above to alleviate the flow (presumably of a humoral substance).
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xvi.	The given medieval medical text appears complex due to its mixture of languages that have evolved
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Translation for "Capitol .xvi." in the context provided seems incomplete or out of place, as it doesn't form a coher
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Translation: Where in the ankle bone there are two large bones of which one is called the talus (the larger), and the other fine, known as the calcaneus or heel bone; thus named because it supports our foot's weight like a foundation.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	Translation: And so with the poultice of breaking applied to both bones in the arm, its healing is similar to that of a broken limb itself; therefore, this operation (likely referring to treating an injury) becomes one as well. Here 'species' refers metaphorically to treatments or remedies used for fractures and injuries which are applied with poultice ('water') like healing the arm—indicative of a restorative approach in medieval medicine that relied on natural substances believed to possess curative properties.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	Translation: If three bones are fractured within the ankle joint (campa), it is considered to be completely broken into parts. This line underscores that in cases where multiple bone segments of the ankle are affected, they may not
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	Translation: If even the fine (subtile) bone is fractured within the ankle joint (campa), it becomes divided into parts as per De Antiochus' methods—referring to classical medical procedures attributed possibly to a physician named Antioco
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	Translation: If the larger bone is fractured within the ankle joint (campa), immediately address it; these are causes beyond your control or immediate means of intervention—suggesting that some injuries may be too severe for initial treatment and require more advanced medical attention, possibly from a specialist. Here 'atrobas' implies urgent action is
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Return treatment extensions and adjustments of the joints according to that manner/way.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	Mayhaps even if the bone of the couch has been set with hammer strikes and is now bent or displaced, stretch it out gently and apply pressure to its top part using your willpower.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: In the cushion there is no cause for an operation on the arms; when you insert and complete the entirety of the surgery with a wooden tongue made from pipe which has been dried out just after stopping (the causes) that have stopped in soles, these pins/staples will be applied to those areas where small growths are present, not using fingers but tools designed for this purpose; and according to their length as per the cushion'dictions, they should enter into place immediately.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Place their pains in three points of extremities and at nighttime, which is why it'dict that this positioning prevents movement from one side (right or left) of the body towards each other; for good measure.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a wooden staff is administered according to the length of the couch, and its position on it allows that thing remains mobile in there.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Mostly when you perform an action upon a breakage, and at that moment it becomes clear for labor or mending as needed.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Here is the line by line translation of the medieval medical treatise:
Capitol .xvii.	The provided text appears as an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise that mixes elements
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	From the breakdown of the heel (talus) and the bones of the foot, as well as those of the toes ("dits").
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Although the foot does not break entirely; some breaks may occur in the leg bones; and to the fingers of the foot few cracks are broken therein, but rather dislocation within their joints.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	If the bones of the foot have been broken and sometimes those bones are raised above them among themselves, then let loose their thighs on the ground prepared for burial with a corpse.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Return the leg over that which is raised from those bones, and apply heat to them; press and massage these limbs until they return to their proper places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Returned pressure and bandaging above (or on top of), and placed a small table in the abdomen where two covers are attached.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Return strength to that which is lacking in the limb' extraneous conditions and you have wrapped it with cloths as well; these are what induce poor health according to doctors (or cause weakness).
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	When three or four days have passed, then unlace the bandage, and you will find that the bones are either fractured or dislocated; in those cases, operations must be carried out with instruments made of brass.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	If your armpits are swolthy and painful, restore them as you will, applying oil and massage on these areas for their healing restoration.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Here the translation of each line into English would be as follows:
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If you have cracked the bones of either two or three joints (or more), then pause on any part of each enclosed limb covered by a lion' extradition robe, and stretch the table in the lower back of the body so that its tongue can remain good.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	It is convenient for you that you do not overlook the causes mentioned to you in other injuries we have discussed, and prepare yourself for whatever comes our way from water (possibly referring to floods or excessive moisture affecting health).
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii. (The provided text does not contain enough context for a
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Fracture of the pubic symphysis in the female and pelvic bone, as well as the hip joint's ligamentum flavomaculatum (translated from Latin/Greek elements).
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the woman'thy joint is broken down (possibly referring to an injury or condition affecting her hip), let it rest in that position on its own parts; and place their weight behind them with their limbs bent at the hips, holding their hands.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	Here the matron applies pressure to the wound dressing and tends with hope; she attends to the woman who is hurt, lifting her small limbs bit by bit until whatever has come out returns within where it was pressed during care accompanied by hope.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	When applied for seven days or brought in herein, that individual is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	If you wish, take one time of sheep'dict and tighten it over the patient's abdomen with a bamboo canula; insert all the bladder into its cavity, then inflate in through the canule to make sure that the bladder is swelled inside the cavity, whereby the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	Return it is filled with bandages and rested for two days after being treated, until healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	When the bones of either man or woman are broken, administer in their restoration and care the water that we have recommended for the thighbone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	When nothing is hidden in these particular types of fractures and few ever return to them, mainly referring back to the place where proper study and use are made according to my free text; this breakdown signifies a direct intervention pathway for healing and restriction on it, hence understood.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	When the wound in the body opens up and bleeds, apply pressure with lint from an old cloth, insert it into that area, cover it completely with a linen wrap, keep covered for three days or send them here where they will heal.
Capitol .xix.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	During the healing of bone fractures in children (who are still growing), it's often referred to as a "childhood fracture." Here is an attempt at
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	At the location where you have fractured bone (when broken), especially if it's large or impactful, similarly to that of your hip or adjacent structures, and which closely resembles how they are connected in yourself; then most likely at this very site you should be immobilized immediately with a splint. This is particularly true when the conditions for performing such an intervention (fracture management) align well as per those who have expertise similar to yours or medical professionals capable of taking care of such injuries, according to your current circumstances and needs.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	If the patient'thy body is flushed with heat, then you should cover them tightly to cool it down if there isn't another cause for this condition.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	When it is time to begin healing the fracture on that day, do not extend beyond today unless gangrene sets in.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	May you soothe the ulcer with warmth; do this within one day since that is when it will give in and not on the third day from now, for then bad accidents may occur.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the bone is broken above the neck of discovery, then when you perform reduction efforts to reduce that and immobilize it with your hands will make those tasks easier and require little extension effort from yourself.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	May it not be contraction, and the knee joint are your extremities; hence you must reduce that within these two or three limbs of this structure: made from iron for a length of seven digits (45 cm) or eight fingers in diameter (about 30 cm), with its height proportional to the amount of clay used. Therefore, it is necessary for the doctor to grind down those three or four according to what you need for healing this fracture throughout all specialties.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And both give relief and a little discomfort for that the comprehension shall not be disturbed on it during the operation time.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is how it goes:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	E it is common in Greek "flying axe-handler," hence, a small cushion.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	For that purpose which is paused at its extension upon the patient' extrémen, it ought to be raised above the bone protruding from the body.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	When he enters a period where bones return and his tongue is engaged with any of the chairs (possibly referring to rest or positioning),
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And so you should grasp the extremities of the fracture with them, and if the patient' extruded limb is delicate, do not apply that good instrument upon it; instead, insert into that bone which has been broken what the tool possesses power for.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	May you not be able to reduce the bones of all that we have prepared, then separate and remove from here what comes down with urine from those who are ill; or if necessary, cut off one of these stones using any available saw in your possession.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Return that which is sharp in the bone' extrices and small knives,
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone is reduced (meaning that it has been set or aligned properly), and with this reduction, the strained malady inflicts intense pain upon it; hence you will understand that the bone shall not return to its natural place again; therefore, grant great benefit to the dislocation.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration is complete and you submerge the cloth in a cold, dry place—particularly if it's summer without stopping to touch or where there might be oil that could cause rubbing and deterioration —so as not for an accidental fall into dust.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	Here the treatment stars at the time of bone restoration in their healing, and lay down what has come to sight as dislocations and use coverings according to the amount found on them.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If it is a flexible ligament strain different from other types of bone fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the patient is large or has a bad condition and fears those misfortunate accidents that cause pain in the area, but does not stop over these pillows where they rest on them, it may be directed to that cover with hard sheets at this place of bedding and hold onto their limbs.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When once or twice a day the patient begins to sweat, which occurs on that part where you have placed your cloth cover (over them), and apply medicated ointment as per our custom for treating diseases, when with liniment/medicine-like substances applied topically.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And when you have prepared the ligament and considered the foulness in each day' extricable hours, between morning and evening until it is consolidated and fixed, ensure that the limb is readied in such manner as to allow for easy insertion of the pincure.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If days pass and the bandage is not solidly fixed in place or does not adhere to it at all, then you understand that these small things have slipped within its folds; thus, when searching for them, proceed with caution as they may still be there.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	From those satagias (swellings or accumulations) that are separated and extracted from them, which if not kept apart and placed on the body may cause pain to occur; therefore take note of these according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If you suffer from soft chest or lung diseases, such as corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary to pause one of those fluids that are appropriate for the treatment described previously in your booklet/account (note: here "capitol" refers metapthyically perhaps to a medical text).
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	When the fluid in which your speech is taking place and you present it now: when large bones of thighs and hips grind together, coming down onto each other as those on larger members do, without presuming to attract or remove that fluids through motion for long periods, suffering acid attacks due to this liquid over time; they have restrained themselves within whatsose they can find relief in. And if you see them seeking help (healthcare professionals), then attend and care for the young ones while continuing self-restraint as much as possible up to XX days or XXX, that is, two dozen or thirty times respectively; but if not visible at all during this period of restraint, do what must be done.
Capitol .xx.	Capital XX. (This line appears to be referencing a specific page or
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	From the healing of connections that you harden within any bone fracture's remnants:  
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Movements are gently coaxed here in the site of bone healing repair, mostly at joints, and they restore the figure of the limb; strongly forbidden is for the body to perform its own work.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Now consider if the binding is recent and administer in that medicine which has tightened his flesh at ease, wine and honey, leeches, serpent venom, as applicable to some or all of them; so apply those medicines where necessary with good constipation (likely referring to making someone'thy bowels move more effectively), applying it internally on the binding site using a sponge, tightening these externally around him for beneficial constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Extract carefully not that which has been inserted for days; and remove it gradually as needed until the swelling subsides, or place a layer of lead undernethyard where metal is used in any parts of the body being treated with mercury.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May it be that the joint has been turned into stone and tightened up where such obstruction is necessary to provoke its expulsion, and divide those excesses or prominent parts of it so as not to worsen what'sup already inside; and cure whatever remains within.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol .xxi.: This line appears incomplete or nonsensical as
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	During the healing of a fracture, when it is restored and properly aligned according to nature's order as per Roman tradition:
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is healed, and Roman restores the subtle and refined part of the body: which injury is not caused by movements for reasons such as excessive use of lubrication (ligaments) or stretching ligaments where nourishment should not run to the limb; or due to an abundance of bandaging used unnecessarily, or movement beyond natural time; or because of sagging flesh in the waistband and belly region for reasons such as excessive eating.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: In giving care for fluid, we drain it from the malady and make the patient'dict heart tender within so that its essence may multiply in him; administer baths, and apply poultices of warmth and honey over him.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return your hand over the body part so that the poultice draws nourishment and returns it back to its normal form within which itself contains water essence, ensuring nutriment circulation is restored.
Capitol .xxii.	Capitolo XXII. (The word "capitolo" means chapter in
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Chapter XXII: In the treatment of fractured bones when set correctly and forbidden their being wet, which covers intervention that keeps them dry. (This translation attempts to convey a medieval medical guideline suggesting care for broken bones should they be properly aligned ("set") without moisture or water exposure during healing.)
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the bone heals after setting and elevation of tortuosity/protrusion in a limb and its bonding, it is guarded against form misfortess; yet your body part may not be forbidden from natural movement, except that which signifies this member was new to fracture. (The translation here indicates medical advice for care post-fracture healing: the injured area should maintain proper alignment and support but still allow some normal function of the limb unless it is a fresh injury.)
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Mays and so stand against the misguided practices of our doctors, which this healing procedure is ruinous in such fear for death's door; these actions lead to one’thy potential demise. (This translation suggests criticism towards what may be considered outdated or dangerous medical treatments that carry a significant risk of fatality.)
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	May if immobilization and binding are recent (i.e., fresh), cover them in a cloth bathed in water where the healing balm is applied, mixed with aloe vera juice or honey for soothing properties; they resemble plant-based remedies known as 'daemens consolidacii.' Or else if these are fatty poultices and smeared on women's breasts to facilitate healing (using olive oil, linseed), apply them likewise. Here the immobilization with bandages or cloth is mentioned along with specific preparations for wound care that were believed beneficial at this time in history:
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Some parts are made wet by persistent cold breeze that is in the upper airs and should be administered movements of the body throughout all hours of the day.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	May if tortuousity arises recently and it becomes a hardened stone causing necessity for its removal by iron hook pin prying out the patient's discharging pus from below the cecum, continuously dissolving bone fragments resulting in excess fluid accumulation due to that of this specific physician’thy intervention.
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of displacement in speech (This translation assumes that "dislocacio" refers metapthyically
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	 Of displacement in any of the joints of one's body, it is forbidden to move and a limb-figure (or arm/leg) injury becomes necessary; this causes pain throughout the abdomen area and severe aches.  
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	So when you bend the patient with a joint dislocation, forcefully apply it until reduced, and if delayed, the place becomes an obstacle for reduction because of increased pain caused by fluid accumulation there.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	Through thus not cover oneself with wool at the time of absorption, frequent movements frequently bring on spasms and pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	May when you have acid poured down, then cover yourself with flaunting the inflammation of the thighs and placing your limb wrapped in water hood and oil for ease; also return its position into relief after resting it to alleviate swelling.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every part of it will be cured by the water from which its memory returns there.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And when orders for loosening displacement according to what has come before in a fracture are given, place it into the lower portion placed by you; from the upper division of the body downward.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capitol .xxiiii.: This line appears to be referencing an item or section within
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Curación del deslocamiento de la mandíbula desde ahora."  
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So dislocated the jaws if not set; and the displacement of both is according to one of two ways: because little removal from their places can restore them a bit (and they are somewhat mollified), or it'thy complete separation with accompanys, until that portion near the joint has been made soft by saliva coming out of the mouth, which prevents retaining and opening his/her own mouth; at this time tongue is wrapped in its word.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	May when the displacement of it is slight, in major positions returns by itself for a small cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	May it be that if there is a complete and total dislocation, then immediate reduction of the limb should be administered without delay.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If it is difficult to reduce (the dislocated jaw), and mostly if both mandibles are examples of displacement, then apply wax or oil in the neck'thy vein so that even reduction of both can be achieved quickly; thus we have what you need here.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they return and their groin is closed and not soothed, place powder of wool on those spots where the drape rests, apply cera (wax) and oil rubbed thereon; this will facilitate your movements with limbs.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	When the patient lies on his back (the bed), and their head rests between two pillows, to ensure that it does not move away from the seventh section or left side; you do not forcefully massage any cause thereof; having provided food for them in a leon form inside until when pains are alleviated and jaws become unclenched, then pour water.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And if it is administered easily, and not to work on the opening of the mouth for consuming food and drinking until the jawbone is numb and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	If the reduction of two dislocated jaws at any time is difficult and cannot be converted into place when they are in their respective locations, then regular fevers occur for days along with constant thirst, and forcefully you will aggraUBLE the abdomen of the patient, causing them to suffer from pure cholera.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	When you take it out again, then understand that I have lost it; and return to the place where it was taken out after such days.
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol .xxv. (This line appears to be an annotation or a
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	The reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the muscle's limb:
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not dislocated from the chest due to its continuous movement; and sometimes it becomes dislocated at the lower extremity, which is declared by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The restoration of him is that his malady presses upon his two legs and extends their bands.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Return (or apply) pressure at that location with your hand for further compression. It will return there again.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Return your hand above that dressing and apply pressure with pillows and stones on it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	May the extremity of that person who has their leg bent and continues in this position, not be dislocated on any day; provided it is reduced and splinted according to what we have said and as per your equipment.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return rest above that plastering, and friction, and drainage; command the humors to settle into tranquility and recovery within which it shall be healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this treatment method, the pain of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place/location.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capitol .xxvi. (This line appears incomplete or possibly not meant for
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	The phrase "de la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle" is Italian and translates to "the reduction of a muscle dislocation
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	The text provided appears to be in Catalan (or related dialects), and it describes three ways by which a muscle may become dislocated: one is the initial event, where something interferes with movement at or near its origin ("la partida del titillic"), causing an injury. The second way mentioned involves immediate aftermath of impact when forceful action occurs right before restoration takes place (as suggested by "a la partida dejos"). However, without the full context and
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	The translation continues in Catalan and it explains that the second way of muscle dislocation is when something hinders movement below (implied by "desus") the affected area, requiring intervention ("fayt tart"). It clarifies this form specifically excludes occurrences behind or due to nerve issues. This provides a description of specific circumstances under which spinal manipulation might be used and indicates that dislocation here is not caused posteriorly (behind) by problems with the shoulder joints nor anteriorly/medially from nervous system complications, but rather possibly involving misalignments or pressure points below (
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	The text further describes that most muscle dislocations occur immediately after trauma ("e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos"), often involving areas where the nerves are thin or small (which could contribute to vulnerability). In some cases, notably in those with existing conditions like carpals swelling and inflammation can complicate dislocations. The passage suggests that such situations may require immediate attention ("mays en les quísmes") due to the potential complexity of treatment required when muscle displacement occurs alongside other issues related to bone movement or nerve involvement, possibly hinting at a more intricate medical assessment and intervention strategy needed for these cases. This detailed exposition underscribes both preventive aspects (avoidance around
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And with the cold applied by pressing or massaging (percussion or cautery), and their muscles are set down due to atrophy, they are jerked because they have already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Now when you cry out that what is within has been forced beyond its bounds and now comes into the healing of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is a displacement of either hip or shoulders, and you apply touch treatment without fear, do not hesitate.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	From this dislocation it is felt a light reduction when cool and the malady inflates into its cavity.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The reduction of the patient is for the minister to raise their mass above them (to elevate and suspend it over them); place gentle pushes on the swelling joints intermittently, strengthening its juncture in its position there, and with this action, after some time, they return gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	If it does not return, and because that dislocation occurs over days, then the swelling of the limp is submerged in tailwater (likely meaning a specific type of fluid used for medicinal purposes), administered with black cumin oil to soften and line up the joints, along with fenugreek and coriander in water; this concoction should also be given.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	If you wish to perform this second maneuver: make present a long home that is from the waist and belongs to it, insert your muscle quickly into the space of the hernia as soon as possible, while another servant pulls out the mass from within its divisions immediately after being inserted by yourself.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the thigh is loose (suggesting a hernia or weakness in that area), then place your hand there because another cause of it being displaced will occur; when this happens quickly return to normal position as much as possible before dislocation occurs again.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And another method of treatment is as follows: make a long staff with which shape will be given; it should not be thick nor subtle and have its rest on the patient's buttocks, just like a mortar ball—and keep it there immediately. Place the support undernegyon (buttocks), so that maladye remains along the length of the staff, with firmness placed over headsyng (bottom) of said staff; extend its application evenly to all parts instantly whereby junctures return quickly back to their proper location due to swift action.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	If reduction of it is difficult for all the reasons previously mentioned, then use this treatment: grasp a stick with the length that reaches up to two arm'se lengths above you and its tilting angle should be four times as long from where your thumb meets your little finger. The weight at the top (usually made of lead) will settle into the pelvis according to this arrangement:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Ensure that the hat rests on his head, in such a way that it does not push upwards against the waistband (of the patient's clothing).
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Here is the translation line by line:
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Now his arm is placed on an oar scale according to latitude, and the hand extends over each joint at once; another cushion hangs from the other side, where the junction occurs next.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	When the patient's internal organ is completed according to any possible way you can achieve it and then cease briefly their titillic spera of wool with a quantity as needed; apply an emplastrum prepared from molten lead mixed with egg whites over all muscle, so that they may be turned upwards above the stricture site, and bind this bandage to the patient's chest where it is attached, ensuring its cleanlinency for seven days without becoming moist.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	When the food of the malady is scarce and has been restrained (or paused), thus allowing the body part to be comforted, then it will heal itself.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And when food is given in greater amounts and the body performs some movement, if it does not close and soften, then already it begins to heal.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to humidity that you have or for some other reason, then in that case three kinds of cautery are administered as stated in the treatise on cauteries.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	If all this pain is present and the ligament or joint has not been closed for seven days, then the bandage and swelling are reduced in some measures here on it; moreover, as you know that their nerves lie within the muscle (at its head), which may be contracted or softened/mollified—and you understand that the joint will never remain fixed at this place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	When joint pain is caused by the dislocation of that which you feel in your knee and chest or other body parts, reduction (returning to position) occurs through pushing and stretching until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if it is necessary for treatment in that area of other constriction, care will be given while healing takes place therein.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	If you harden the body' extrication in their limb and slow down its movement, then have mercy on them with regular baths until that gravity is alleviated and they return to their original state of nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol .xxvii.: (This line appears to be referencing a specific section or
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Curación of the displacement of the hip." This translation suggests that the original text is discussing medical treatment for what seems like a
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	When the hip joint is dislocated and seems difficult; it's dislocated in all parts mostly at the part behind (the gluteus medius), which isn'thy when I adjust its position after manipulation or touch as per any form of displacement, then you have manifestly declared that the juncture has become concaved and cannot bend your arm nor touch it where said muscle is.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	When the hips are affected (or have contracted), reduce it so much that you return to its original position of setting in cauterization; if there is already an apostema set in place, difficult will be reduction and cannot heal completely from all aspects – especially when they occur behind, where malacias derived entirely from other components of dislocation come with continuous painful urges towards that area.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	When the restoration of it is possible, which means that its body part must be extended with hands and arms outstretched, while doctors stand on their hips/knees and push downward at the joints in their palms or between the thumbs (where they hold their tools), to return them back into position.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is at the joints ahead of time, then return it so that your hand presses against its own position inside while making contact with the groove on the backside of its palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	If dislocation does not obey reduction, then apply vigorous extension and strong motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	When two ministers stretch out their arms and hold that instrument of each other, thus preventing excessive extension from occurrthy hands.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And turn your arm completely around, placing a long cloth or bandage over the area of it, with lint attached (likely referring to applying a dressing).
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	When the doctor touches the joint, apply some oil to it so that these causes which help in its lubrication are activated; and after applying emollient internally with strong purgatives until the joint returns (heals).
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Ensure that the reduction of his body where he is lying down on which there is fixation and accumulation of bile in the gall bladder, and stricture at the point descending from the chest, with arms suspended by the collar.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And so if the joint is formed in that place, there you will cut through it and apply that thing to it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If you see the joint not strained, then apply the plaster and bandage repeatedly until it is brought out again; also return that which has come out during these days.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If you apply pressure to the reduction of the joint and its position is in motion, then administer moisture with warmth gently but firmly until it relaxes; when this occurs at the fatty muscle hernia site, secure it therein (with binding) and place that over the bones during daytime and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Return that which is retained there (the swelling or accumulation), and immerse it in the bath; when discharged, rub on the joint where heat has begun to arise quickly upon movement, doing so repeatedly for relief—these are days one, two, and three.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Intramedically (or within), where it enters/enters into its layer (the mentioned organ).
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	If you wish, pause over that wet and split cow'se edge and stand on it; make several attempts, until the place becomes dry and returns to its original state or disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii. (This line appears to be referencing a specific section or
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Regarding the care for displacement of bones, it is at the joint between the arm and the body where treatment should be focused.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	When some of the masses are displaced, and reduction of the dislocation is easier, except when its speed during correction at the time it was displaced causes an apsectomy or incision for drainage in that location, then:
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	Even if the palm is resting on the stomach of her (the patient), then have it placed over a table to extend and reduce; and if there's dislocation beforehand, position their body so that its abdomen lies directly above the tabletop, ensuring the doctor can manage the impending joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns soon, good be; otherwise, that which is stressed will soften the inflammation and cease from there on out; do not interfзу with its reduction to such pressure points as they go through each day.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	Mightily the joint according to its twistiness; and there is no cause in the spleen, but it softens itself without a reason, for you understand that the nerves are either compressed or stretched out, and only when properly tightened by cautery will provide some fluid balance.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	So when they return discomgy (disgrace or shame), then place the dress that has been recommended upon them, and fasten it tightly for days on end; also cut off their clothing and exercise with vigor until full recovery is achieved.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the patient'se restlessness occurs and you apply it to their lower back or abdomen with some water (enough) warmth and heated waters in a few times until they are calmed down.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol .xxix. (This line is likely an indication of a
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	From the treatment of joint dislocations." This sentence suggests that what follows might be advice, techniques or methods related to addressing and tre
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some wanderings have caused the joints to become misaligned throughout the body. Here we are discussing instances where lack of movement, incorrect posture or physical trauma has led to joint displacement
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	When a joint of those in the hands or abdomen is dislocated, bend and pull it back into place until return." This guidance indicates that when such an injury occurs—specifically to fingers (hands) or organs/intestines within the belly (abdomen), one should gently attempt manual manipulation of the affected area. The goal is to reposition, or 'return', what has become dislocated back into its proper location without causing further harm; suggesting a cautious and direct approach consistent with medieval medical practice's emphas
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Support the head of the joint and suspend that which was displaced at its location, leaving it for two days." Herein lies advice to provide restorative care by stabilizing not just one part of a limb (e.g., arm or leg), but specifically supporting the skull in cases involving cranial dislocation—a practice reflecting an understanding that different
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Suspend and extend what has been displaced until it is firmly anchored in its place by then." This suggests that after initial rest (two days as previously mentioned), continued care involves the use of bandages or similar methods to maintain proper alignment, likely referring to immobil
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	When night comes not, she will recount that tale again and cease to remove it during the daylight hours, placing it at night time only—doing so for days until steady." This passage offers a regimen wherein an injury (possibly bandaged or casted) is removed periodically as described in storytelling ('narracio'), likely indicating some form of controlled therapy. It emphasizes the importance of rest, careful movement reintegration into daily life at nighttime when perhaps conditions are cooler and more stable ("streyt"), reflecting medieval medical understandings regarding healing cycles influenced by time-of-day
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	When it seems like water in the belly has been displaced and is directed towards that area; perform the first operation for drainage while they recover.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	When it is similar in nature when displaced to other parts of the body.
Capitol .xxx.	The provided text seems like an attempt at translating concepts from medieval medical practices
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	From the treatment of vertebral displacements in two places (this could refer to a condition where there are multiple instances or significant issues with vertebrae, possibly suggesting
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When any of the vertebrae in the back or neck are dislocated completely and there is movement at those points which cannot be treated here (implying that immediate medical intervention elsewhere may not always be possible), then death results from blood loss into the abdomen ("the upper region"). The translation suggests a severe spinal injury with potential life-threatening consequences, possibly indicating limited treatment options and urgent need for advanced care to prevent fatal outcomes.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	It is said that the discharge of blood from within (possibly referring to internal bleeding or hemorrhage) goes beyond one's control and cannot be stopped; consequently, softening occurs in either their limbs or both legs—a condition indicating profound weakness. Additionally, a vertebra may prolapse here, resulting again where movements exacerbate the injury (indicating that even gentle motions are harmful) until such time as these actions cease and become restorative measures for treatment: divided into four parts or stages of medical care required to address this serious condition.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Thus, it is swolthy at the back parts and there's no healing lubrication.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	May the cure of him/her be that you will consider if the yellow discharge from infancy is not a cure for them nor healing for their whole body.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	May return to those who come for cure or examination through speaking in elaborate curative speeches; may they also uncover what was previously withhidered from view, as this leads back to the truth and gives rise to diverse instruments of that very thing which I have shown and made them experience.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: "E dic that in coldey location from where it is pierced hereabouts there, not healing or sanitation of this place exists; and seemingly so affected by two locations.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	From that one is not cured but rather healed by what you apply directly on their back properly and appropriately as recommended.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The swelling is extended over the patient'se face above the joint of the hips, and it is spread quickly due to excess fluid that should not be seen on their chest.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Place the straight staff upright on the ground at the end of the patient's leg, under their head; and another axe in water to be placed on the other foot' extramundi (the outer part).
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister holds the staff and it is not fixed in a hole; another minister holds the second one like that.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	When wrapped over the head of the patient's thigh and tightly fastened with strong bands, extend the limb part up to where it meets the head; secure that band here, then apply another band on the legs attached by their cushions (probably referring to leg supports or splints), attach these as well. Finally, adjust all straps and bind them together in the other staff which holds the patient'se feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Here the minister extends the ligature to the part of the beam, and they are not interchanged between the two beams where fittings have been done; however, they should not remain fixed in that manner as we have mentioned before.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: The doctor presses their palms against the spine for strength while returning it into place and adjusts on top of that table how they should sit, keeping everything in position as much as possible.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If it does not return through this form, then take a table of which the length or width is three feet, and dig in the wall where we have mentioned that the malady resides within its limit at the end of the table'thy extent.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	If you wish to restrain what has been revolved above the body; and it is necessary for you to keep your head down below the waist at the end of each staff length (which are as long as an arm), with the top ends together on your back, two staves' lengths apart, where there will be a palm between them; now that which has been revolved can already be found in any rod within which it turns around. And what is fixed firmly to the ground so that it does not gout.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And take a staff in which you can turn it and rotate between the two sticks of each pair.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	In the limb there is a defect in which a lance forms its length, that amount being equal to a handful of water when it turns (presumably by dipping or pouring). In the two other lances they resemble each other.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Here comes the source sentence to translate: E aprop strenh le lynments qu'avés streyt per la pietze del maalte an el trow keis loes kava, e le linaments que avés streyt per les coyssas de lu en lo torne keis li pes dul.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	Return each turn and place one minister who tightens the turn at its location; let the doctor manipulate the spine as we have described.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is how it goes: (Here "this" refers back to a method or procedure previously described in
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Then return the spine to its place, and cover it with linen or wool padding from a cloth album, ensuring that three fingers' width is left around each bend of the cane (the handle), allowing just enough length so as not to compress the area affected by numbness. And position your hand over this cushioning splint on top of the spinal column where it rests against the chair back, ensuring comfort and support for the patient's condition.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	Return its ligaments as we have mentioned before, and place the abdomen'softissue within so that it heals properly.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If there is any indication of a disease at the beginning of healing, then medicines that moisten and cleanse will be administered for long-term treatment as recommended (which we have), and they are already being applied in this location with iron plate lamination.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And at times there are signs of impending danger in the lower back vertebrae, and they dislocate due to that displacement; it is this one from which you cannot foresee harm before applying this medicine, lest great damage befall upon thee.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol XXVII. (Note: The Roman numeral "XXV
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of hock joint dislocation care.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You understand that the joint between the thigh and the muscle is not dissolved merely by itself but only so much, and you do not injure those same humors in other smaller recessions of body cavities.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	E the wide joint is dislocated according to four ways, it can be dislocated at the divisions of the legs (partes dentises), or below the divisions of the legs (parte deforezas), or in front of the divisions of the legs (parte dantas), or behind the divisions of the legs (parte detras).
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	Mostly these joints are out of place, and rarely in front or behind them.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The translation of this medieval medical treatise line by line into English would be as follows:
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	When the name of that individual is dislocated from between his parts as he extends further with the cushion undernethy, and if it continues to force itself towards these areas where movement cannot occur; its urine becomes retained therein, and the swelling within him has an apoplectic spot applied upon it. And you must walk on their foot above this area of tendon (heel).
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	May reduction of these spices for this dislocation is what you consider, and indeed if the dislocation is old and ancient, as has already been done by the treatment you administer here, it's not entirely in that cure; hence there won't be a prospectus. And so now we proceed with:
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	May occur in the place where dislocation is recent, and it belongs to one of the four species of dislocation; there you should catch what has come out (the joint), return it (to its position) and extend that joint both upwards towards the upper body parts and downwards towards the lower body parts. Rightly turn back (dislocate it correctly); this does not require other treatments from additional care.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	May it be that if the patient does not return in this manner, then you must prepare strong medicine and extend the cushion from where they were placed quickly or slowly (or apply ointment on top of said removed area), while another attendant extends such medication above them; furthermore, tighten a leather strap over their lower back part covered by cloth, with one servant holding their hands.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	When it extends from here or where the bone ends at the shoulder joint, or below this point of the sternum and breastbone,
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	When all of them are extended within a period while the hump is lifted up and falls down,
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This specific type of extension occurs in all four parts as well.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the displacement returns due to water we have discussed, do as you wish for it; otherwise, it is necessary throughout all special waters that must be spoken of regarding its own treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the patient's reduction, when dislocated and displaced to their joints, so that the hump is placed on its back side; and pause the ligaments at the knee area where they are between the head of the thigh and the place where it protrudes outwards during labor; and extend them along the part of the shoulder connected with either end of the collarbone.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another minister with great force beats the limbs of him, and presses firmly on the hollow of the thighs to extend them violently; whereupon that place returns to its original position.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This specific substance is for purulent care of which this limb has been reduced, and other such are used with it to treat the same condition as well.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	May it be that you are at rest on us and do not resist this special form of healing care; for the two feet of the thigh we bound together with strong thread, rope, both legs, and both lower limbs hold our hands.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	Whenever any part of a person' extruded length is equal to four digits and the size of their groin extends more than two digits, it implies that there may be an issue with body humors or excessive fluid accumulation. (This sentence likely refers to abnormal swelling in certain parts of the body which could indicate medical conditions.)
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	When the patient'thy abdomen is hung upon his head and in such manner that it lies down on him (lying position), and its length from the ground up equals two braces, here comes:
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the reduction itself, when it dislocates from its original position and causes pain in the groin as per our recommendations (per what we've recommended), hold the hernia over the affected area properly with your hand; also ensure that you support the abdomen undernethy.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Here are the translations line by line:
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	Each minister extends to his/her portion, and the doctor uses her hand for reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Thus, if you heed the prescription, it will be resolved quickly; but if not, rest over that which we have discussed in order to recover through this cooling methodology.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	May it be that the thigh's humidity settles upon our bodies?
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	When dislocation is at the joints below, it is then necessary to stretch out this cushion and as for that treatment described by our medicine master; let the doctor's palm of his right hand rest on the lower thigh bone, while he presses with the other palm upon that contraction area, pausing there until the extended cushion reaches down to the joint below.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If dislocation is at the joints behind (behind), they do not cover where the malady has extended to the parts backward; having a place covered over what causes hardship, when part of it in front becomes dislocated from these areas, according to what we have said about its appearance on two broad sections—there should be no pain.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	When compression is applied with a table over the location where pain occurs at the joint,
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So once the reduction is complete as commanded — and do not call it "the pulling of lu" by you, for that's your task to extend from below (from the hips), placing cushions there, another servant on their legs, and one on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Return the ligaments and bandage back into place, comparing one cushion with another.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When you see those knots in the womb (uterus), you understand that the displacement is already fixed, and thus let the uterus return.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	If you see any cause of suppuration (indicating inflammation or infection), return and bandage that area according to your first treatment method, and apply it again for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And apply that one there, and let it take time in walking on these for several days until they are comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	In this translation from an old medical treatise that mixes elements of Latin with Italian
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	When translating text, especially one as historical and potentially archaic or specialized like a medieval medical document, it's important to consider
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	When the hip is dislocated according to three manners—it' extrinsic parts (the portions outside), intrinsic parts (intramedullary sections within bone marrow cavities, not visible externally as in joint articulations with other bones but relevant for internal assessment and treatment of a hernia-like dislocation inside the pelvis or thigh region; extraneous to these—the hip is also non-dislocatable from behind (posteriorly), suggesting limited mobility that must be carefully assessed, as this can indicate specific types of injuries.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The sign of displacement for him is that you command the malady (the condition) to apply its cushion at the thigh, and as long as it does so, he will not be disabled/paralyzed (deaf).
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	In English line by line translation, this medieval medical treatise reads as follows:
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Emplasthe that and fix it at the knee joint with bandages for three or four days, and apply those as well.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Not use the humoral fluid for walking on cold days until it is healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If your reduction of it is excused from you, then administer great extension force to the ligaments mentioned in its previous treatment for the joint.
Capitol .xxxiii.	The text provided seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discussing
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	From what you've given, it appears that the phrase "Capitol .xxxiii." is likely referencing a specific source or section in another work
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The translation of the provided medieval medical text into English is as follows:  
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The translation of each line from medieval Latin-influenced text into English is as follows:
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	May the cure for this person be of lighter redistribution and it is that they will spread out easily within where return can happen.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	When in the treatment when it is dislocated according to complement, make sure you straighten out the thigh correctly and hold that position with a strong and worthy servant from behind of where they stand at their place on this spot here (the current location).
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And place yourself between the patient'thy thighs and his right side of the body in the location of the cushion, holding your left hand therein.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Here's the line by line translation:
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	E as drogas are taken according to how much has been consumed.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	When you tighten the patient'dict chest into the flat cushion and yourself are at the bedside.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if he returns on the fifth day or within two days of this treatment and his foot swells again, then all is well (it means that the condition has improved), but otherwise repeat the operation until there is a return to health.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	May you be forbidden from reducing the patient' extruded intestine that we have reattached, then they will complain of their entrails over their knees on solid ground, and initiate a firm mattress in the soil between their thighs; already wrapped in cloth to prevent them from seeing their entrails.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The minister of his hand holds their thighs, and another minister extends either leg or sinew above the chest's collarbone; each one is extended against the patient'thy outward extension, so that he shall not be drawn back towards any part.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Here the doctor applies pressure on the displacement, and another minister holds the healthy hernia in place until it returns to its ease/position.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and it is declared to you that reduction has been restored, then apply firm pressure with an ointment or salve on that area, and bind the foot to the cushion tightly.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	Where you fear or protect the nerves that are behind your ankle, to prevent the ligament from being violent and leading astray:
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Return that item for two or three days and if it is made softer by the ligature, extend that as well.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Return that particular in the day or at night for forty days and prevent you from indulging excessively (in food).
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If you forcefully go into that space, it is not certain that the detachment will not be on a decayed and corrupted area, nor will it receive treatment carelessly.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	If you apply a caustic on him/her/them there (the patient), make sure to administer it in the place where we previously mentioned this treatment and recovery process will continue herein until healing occurs fully.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	The provided text appears to be instructions from an old medical perspective possibly related to treatment of joint pain
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Regarding the setting in place (repositioning) of displaced bones, particularly those within the feet: It is necessary for proper care and
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	When someone has a displaced bone that needs to be set back in place: It is necessary for them to lie with limited extension of their three limbs (arms and legs); if it's not difficult, use gentle forceful movements herewith referred as "ligatures".
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in one of the bones above the knee (hips), then to set it back into position: One must place moisture on the muscle and skin over that joint area either directly upon earth or a tabletop; keep them as they were while lying down. This implies immobilizing both body parts for healing, similar in intent but not necessarily mirroring modern practices of splinting with materials like fiberglass casts.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Maintain the position of your body weight downwards and apply pressure on those parts over which you have identified joints; additionally cover that area with some form of padding or cushion, ensdict as necessary where it enters inside (probably referring to a limb within an exoskeleton-like device) for return. Then observe if the person's leg now remains correctly positioned and has not reappeared in its elevated state above normal resting level: This statement suggests monitoring after setting procedures, ensuring immobility where required – likely indicative of early practices involving manual adjustment or physical supports to manage dislocations. The translation seeks the essence but may diverge from current medical understanding
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Return the patient's belly with a board that presses completely on their body; apply this for three days and afterward change it along with rest, allowing them movement only when necessary until they are strengthened and rehabilitated.
Capitol .xxxv.	Given that this text is written in an archaic form of Latin influenced by
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Regarding the spices used for displacement, whether they are internal (in a wound or bone) or external to any organism/body part:
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When you have any cause of that and yourself penetrate into the cure as well as in the restoration thereof, it is success assuredly leading to life.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And now immediately perform reduction in the body of the cause hereby avoiding an abscess formation; this is to prevent further complications. (Here "esforsa" can be interpreted as 'now' or 'soon', suggesting immediate action, and "reduccio en le comensament de la causa" refers metapthyically to addressing the root cause of pain
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And when the limb returns as we wish it to do so quickly, administer the regimen that prevents an abscess and heals what is needed according to our lubricants (ointments or medications). Here "aposta" refers not only to prevention but also implies a treatment approach aimed at curing. The term 'plagua' in this context likely means wound dressings, referring specifically to the materials used for covering and treating affected areas after they have been cleaned ("desiccatius", meaning dried out
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if you dislocate a bone and cause it to break the articulated parts apart, perform their restitution back into position (setting), using materials for simple dressings previously mentioned in those locations of injury; this is an immediate course of action needed after such incidents. The term 'malauxis' here refers specifically to injuries or wounds that require cleaning with the already described substances ("accideys en le os satagias" – breaking a bone into parts).
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	Watch and avoid according to your will that which is inside the body through those channels of fear as I have previously instructed you; this is better for you than what comes from any creator, potentially referring not only to one’s own health but also spiritual or ethical choices in life. This line can be interpreted metaphorically with "intrament" suggesting something internal and possibly harmful ("temor"), while the advice appears as a call towards self-discipline over fear (fear of consequences). The phrase suggests that taking control rather than relying on external forces, which could include supernatural or divine entities referenced by “Creator,” aligns with one's long-term wellbeing ("gloria") and is beneficial for health. Lastly, it speaks to the importance of mindful living within a cosmic context where taking care of
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Ayssi refine the voices of Alphonsem so that no harm befalls them from above by God.
Amen.	Given that this text is written in an
