Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Ayssi begins speaking about Albulaccius.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh children, you have completed this book before me, the last of medical science'dictions, due to your mastery over it as evidenced by how quickly and effectively you learn from what I present; through my lectures, explanations, and declarations, I see that you understand thoroughly this subject matter which is apart from surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	When the operation is exhausted in our region and at all times, as long as I observe you (the patient), until only small descriptions remain from Ancient texts, which I change into these errors and ignorance; they are closed off by my understanding of it, thus lengthening its force and art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	Through what Hippocrates says about it being movement (motion), may in small things be observed and mostly in the work of hands (handcraft).
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	May we already have this information about it as we enter here; who does not know what we have told them regarding anatomy will fall into error in the end, since those people are formed by these things and take from that science and their experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And another doctor ordered that the patient swallow a stone from within which had progressed in its state, and this stone was large; it was drawn out through one of the bladders, so that by the third day, the internal substance died inside the urinary bladder.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you have already called for it to be removed there, and because of the greatness of the stone and due consideration given by the abdomen's position beneath her that she will die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And another doctor takes pay from our lord of this land for surgery, and brings with him a black instrument which was used by someone else due to his fracture in the thigh; thus prepares the doctor based on ignorance, extracts the fracture onto soft materials like pillows and beds, without letting air escape into these.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	Here you return the ligaments according to your wishes, and secure them in place with pins during rest days and command that we remove the stitches; at this time, the thigh and buttocks will form an opening (perforation).
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And it is called him (referred to as 'lu'), and his apparatus was used for untying the ligature, achieving calmness and relief from their pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	Indeed at that time there was confirmed decay in the limb, so it could not be restrained and did not stop moving within while the malady persisted.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And another doctor pierced an abscess, and it became ulcerated for several days until its wickedness was clear to them lord of the patient.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the head was treated for yellow bile (choler), and it does not affect them entirely but rather the member where they have been hosted since then.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	For water (or humor), children, it is necessary for you that the operation be planned in two parts: one associated with health and another where there are greater dangers involved.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	Therefore take up your arms in solicitude and for the protection of God, and your diseases are strengthened and firmly held.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	Here comes the translated text line by line into English:
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Water also enters some of your joints," - Here translates as "Aqua anche penetrare in alcune sesui delle tue articolazioni.
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Not all illnesses are due to bad humors, for doctors cannot name them thusly." - Here translates as "Non tutte le malattie sono dovute a cattivi umori, poiché i medici non possono dar loro il
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you (you) already possess this book's next three chapters." - Here translates as "Ti già possiedi gli ultimi tre capitoli di questo libro
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, starting with the first chapter." - Here translates as "Iniziare il divario del libro, iniziando dalla prima parte.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered within the body, in terms of instruments and surgical tools required for intervention." - Here translates as "Il primo capitolo all'interno del corpo, riguardo agli strumenti e alle ferriere necessarie per l'intervento." This sentence suggests that there is a specific order or hierarchy to be followed when it comes to the instruments and surgical tools needed for an operation. The context appears medical (given words like "capitol," which
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second chapter." - Here translates as "Il divario del secondo capitolo." This sentence
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter on cupping and cauterization; draining wounds with leeches, removing spirits from those afflicted to them herein arranged by the forms of instruments." - Here translates as "Il secondo capitolo su intorciamento e cavitazione; svuotamento delle ferite con i veleni da insetti, rimozione degli spiriti per quelli colpiti fino a loro disposizione organizzata nelle forme dei strumenti." This sentence indicates that the second chapter discusses various medical procedures such as cupping and cauterization
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the clean portion.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third part of restoration and displacement, as well as the curing of twisting and appearance for these purposes; ordered within its place in the head under pressure, and forms the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cupping therapy (foc) and acute medicine and recollection of suffering,
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	At that point begins the treatment of all free parts.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	When you examine the quality of that poultice and its application to him/her, where it is forbidden to apply treatment:
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	So it is said that the speech of cautery and its nonessential (perhaps meaning unnecessary or irrelevant) are long and elaborate, subtle by science, with hidden motives; they argue much about fine points and disagree among themselves, which for me suffices as a brief part of their discussions.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And it is said that the pointed cautery comforts all of the body universally, except for two kinds of its matter, which are tail matters.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the complexity of a dry and dehydrated body; they find that warmth pleases one therapy for it, while others prefer its contrary, as this is suitable in both quality and dryness, where nature itself is such—wherefore necessity dictates pouring water into what's dried out and then heating up the same to cure.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	Through the speech of that person, I have discovered some things for myself at times.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	May nevertheless he who comes after expels that which has already been drained out and exercised in the place of cauterization for today's practice, understanding both the complexity of human composition and the disposition of diseases within their bodies, as well as the causes of those ailments and accidents, along with the time span of these conditions.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	May occur in other complexities as well, not out of fear, but mainly due to excessive humors and moist conditions; all doctors agree on this matter, without concern for the strength required for cauterization in these situations.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And as for those who understand the secret of healing with fire and know their patient well, they use medical cautery on this point only, which reaches the part that has been cauterized but does not affect the other parts of the body unless minor harm is done to them.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	May the medicine burn reach him in those parts where he was laid low, and forcefully bring about recovery of that ill body which is difficult to cure and forces its way out.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	May the fire (or heat), due to its sublimity and good substance, does not cause harm unless in excess; we have come to know this through experimentation and long study of service towards mastering art on truth about causes; therefore you are excused for lengthy discourse here as I secretly manipulate the focus, aimed at expelling illnesses from their courses.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And wise men understand that it is most appropriate to perform cauterizations and breaks in the early months of pregnancy.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E yeu dic that cauteries are convenient at all times, in order that the harm caused by water retained within the caustic may be drawn out and mostly when they are necessary for pains or essential needs such as bloodletting and bleeding which do not suffer delay due to fear of malevolent spirits; it is considered greater evil than small temporary injury.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	So don't put pressure on your feet or knees, for ordinary people and doctors consider them as the cause of this illness that is treated with cautery but not completely eradicated; thus they impose rest periods to deal with these consequences.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	The cause is not due to what they eat and drink (water), for the treatments are only in places of medicine that alter the constitution and dry up the humours, which are causes why pains come about.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Even if it is necessary for points beyond what medicine typically requires, due to the patient'sin health and strength of work executed by their lord/master, use additional cautery accordingly.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	Even though it is common speech that lancets are the tools of medicine and this language is not understood by me because I do not know how to deepen my understanding through these instruments or other causes related, as far as they belong to medical treatment with a scalpel (cauterization) neither shall I proficiently treat them.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And those made of gold are better than those made of iron for caulcerating purposes, and they were not used except where there is equality with silver in substance (quality).
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	Through this we place our iron hooks gently, putting them down for the operation preparation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And in the instruments of cautery, as ordered hereinabove concerning their usage within the limbs (specifically feet), they have arranged them accordingly to satisfy whoever requests it from him/her.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of coldness and moisture for head pain relief using cautery instruments.
Le capitol primier.	The First Principle.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization conveys moisture and coldness to the accident that is causing it; its cause is a lot of fluid discharge from headaches down limbs' joints and fingers, prolonged sleeping periods, dental pain, gout throughout illnesses characterized by chilliness due to fluid accumulation or paralysis-apoplexy, as well as resemblance in these maladies.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: firstly command the humors to be expelled through medicine-cleansing actions for three or four nights, depending on the discharge rate of the humor and the patient'se age and habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E aprop comanda li that race his head may rise, and have him set here between their bodies on an erected bench so as not to rest upon their heads.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	Return your hand'softhepalmto preventthe patientfromsneezingbetweenthesetubulesofyournostrillregionwithanother servant positionedaboveandbelowon their body,holding theirhandstogether.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	Even though the heat has reached that location from above as indicated by signs therein, they apply fire to the caustic of which this is one form.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E propria pausa quelso s'intenda arribeder una tentura, à malo che declina, là dove le vena si contragghi poco per volta, ed in tal modo lo girovogli.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	Once you have inserted a small amount of salt and dissolved it over the place, let it act there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And place your hand over his chest where it has begun at the border, and lay that upon him who is disrupted by a broken shield of the focus (possibly referring to someone with signs or symptoms related to a healing injury).
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Return care to the wound area within which it is healing.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And when a sick person has urinated (diyserò), they take the bedclothes and wash them with water for as much time as possible, so that it is better and more beneficial for health recovery.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And those who are bleeding within the body have their wounds sealed with a cauterizing instrument, and it is placed inside until any division of the bone has healed.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Return its moisture that is lost from bone, and attend to it as well.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	Here come others with the lancets to enter and before entering into the strong bone within which it enters already, this is the form of apoplexy smallness.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	E from that location exhales the head' extraneous humors.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	If there has been an opening of the wound for a long time, and it is healed within that period.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	Mays I have not seen these various cautery instruments for all, but in wise homes according to fear; and such one must you provide me better health when the head is developed through solar contemplation as we observed among other members, especially when it pertains to the natural growth of the abdomen.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And if it is possible that this initial form of cautery may save and be more beneficial, then from there they seek health for themselves using their work herein.
Capitol segon.	Capitol Second.
Del cauteri del cap.	From the points of the caustic (pointing towards 'cautery
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the whole head there is chronic and long-lasting pain, and it resides within the spleen extended for a while, using knives and cupping glasses as well as lancing needles and scrapings of mercury or lead (which were believed to be implicated), with hands holding these tools—if any cautery has already been applied on such areas without further investigation into their causes; moreover, if the spleen's nature is characterized by significant heavy metal content in its constitution; it does not constitute excessive harm and abomination (as they would perceive), hence why another caustic tool should be used immediately for treatment.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Return that over the head of your neck with caustic inside while cutting the tendon.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the ribcage and expose its thickness as we have recorded and will cauterize that portion in the lower part of the chest where it is being applied, which is also the location for applying a bellows (ventouse).
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand so high that you do not discover the bones, for when humors have attacked them severely and caused great pain different from pains treated by other caulters of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And apply this cautery in its place, where the same cautery will heal the corns on the head and back (the vertex), which they have applied as treatment here at this location; this is how it'dicted by them.
Capitol ters.	The translation of "Capitol ters" line by line into
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	In this context, translating the Latin phrase "Caute irundo," one could interpret it as a call to surgical intervention or precise action concerning an obstruct
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When arthritic joint pain becomes persistent or when the ache enters into the groin area, let physicians administer immediate care for these conditions; and here two kinds of surgical intervention are mentioned: cauterization as provided by acute medicine burns treatment, or with iron. This means that there were believed to be specific treatments involving heat application from a burning agent in traditional medical practices (acute comburent) alongside the use of metal tools for this purpose – likely hot irons used on wounds and lesions following an infectious outbreak within maladies, which required immediate attention.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May healers use medicine as a means of incineration and take that piece out along with both the hands of your patient.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And apply pressure at the location of pain on one side with a sharp lance inserted wherein it is hidden within its fleshly place until you find that which was concealed undernethy joints and bones, namely, your own coccyx (tailbone).
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Here is the line-by extraneous to English translation of this medieval medical text:
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Return care is given that it enters where healing occurs within them (referring back into themselves), with this ointment inside, and another attendant on their legs/ch
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you bring water with some of the burning remedies that you have written in the section on caustic medicines, it implies preparing and using these substances as treatment for certain conditions according to ancient medical practices described within those pages. Here, 'tu voys' means "you would," suggesting a hypothetical or instructional context where someone is advised what actions should
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	According to this method, the practice of cauterization involves using fire as follows for treatment (implying there's a specific technique being referred to): The use of heated substances or instruments is indicated here. In ancient medicine texts like these, cauterization often involved applying heat directly to wounds to seal them and prevent infection
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	And it is called "claus clavilhs," where the head of your instrument takes on a shape similar to that of a key (likely referring to an actual physical implement used in treatments), and at this spot, you insert or press into place something small for assistance – possibly indicating another tool's purpose within their practice. Here 'es apelat claus clavilhs' could mean the name given by physicians or practitioners of these ancient times to a particular device used in treatments involving
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then place your hand over the location of pain – ensuring that you prevent harm from coming to those joints (likely referring back, as in cauterization or other forms of hands-on treatment) which could be at risk due to conditions like arthritis ('la qual es dejos'), and slowly rotate a small tool — perhaps indicative of another instrument used for this purpose. Here the action is focused on handling delicate areas with care, possibly indicating manipulation techniques or therape
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	If the amount of humidity that has been accumulated through nasal secretion is as much as what you have secured in your mouth, then place your hand over it to prevent the artery from being blocked wherein blood flow will not occur.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you go ahead, then perform cauterization on the extremity of the lancet according to previous cauterizations, and watch carefully for any incision of an artery in this operation without haste.
Capitol quart.	Capital quintus (Assuming "capitol
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	From ancient times of cauterization, specifically on the thighs ("cauterizatio" referring to a medical procedure involving heat or chemical application;
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat ingrown toenail conditions as discussed in previous curative advice for various diseases, and if not properly addressed, the condition worsens; it'thy that when igniting a cauterizing tool within which has been heated or chemically prepared (perhaps referring to medical treatment with heat), placing your hand over this spot denotes where the prolonged line of pain lies along which is said here. Thus restrained by an intermittent application and persistence, you apply pressure using forceps through small incisions into flesh until it reaches bone: then stop applying direct touch (implying a pause or cessation), holding your hand with such intention to maintain control over the area of pain while proceeding.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the protruding jaw that chews, and prevent lacerations from occurrthy thereof and nervous issues associated with said mouth defect; lest spasms occur.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	If it is about the custody and caution of blood flow from the artery that expels, there is fear in its exit, mostly for those who do not know what causes it and does not study them; perform the operation with care at this time.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	When you come for recall of the flow of sickness from the aorta according to the doctor's methodology, in this free space hereby provided.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	If you experience this illness that does not satisfy the treatment and if it affects even the head area of the malady, then cauterize there at the forehead spot where we have previously mentioned, taking care to heal whatever is inside.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	If you come, administer the same cautery that we have mentioned in Chapter IX of External Cautery Treatment and there is even more to be said about this treatment which will provide better healing effects.
Capitol .v.	Capital (This line is not complete enough for translation; it seems
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	The provided Latin-like text appears related to medieval medicine, specifically referring to the treatment of joint pains with cold humors—a concept from ancient medical theories like those
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the elbow there is pain caused by congelation and disease within it, for which I have described another form of treatment herein written; hence this specific method will not be subjected to heat (which could potentially worsen inflammation), rather hot irons are used as cauterization tools. Here refers the aforementioned tool known as "puncture" or pointed instrument for cauterizing, which is employed in addressing such conditions of pain and swelling within an elbow affected by cold humoral excesses causing localized distress that needs remediation without resort to thermal methods due to their potential detrimental effects on inflammation.
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Long ago you have used the sharp points of the lancet for very small punctures, which were necessary to tempt that place where your hand is located today.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	If all points created by the healing instruments on the entire body are done so and attended with care for those places that have been made healthy, ensure proper attention to these areas.
Capitol .vi.	Capitolo VI. (The text seems to be numbered as
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Chapter VI concerning scalpel treatment or incision for removal of a wound, appendage, etcetera.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Chapter VI concerning scalpel treatment or incision for removal of a wound/appendage; these are cured and treated with caustic substances as mentioned in the divisions of diseases (presumably referring to specific remedies involving spices used internally). In this translation, I have retained terms like "scalpel" which refers back to surgical treatment or incision. The mentioning of curative agents such as cauterizing substances suggests a medieval medical practice where
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid the use of caustic species that are used to dry out or cause muscle contractions (possibly referring to specific treatments involving certain plant-derived substances known for their desiccating and stimulating effects on nerves). Here, "eschiva
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that species of scalpel for purging and cleansing (implying detoxification or expulsion), such as a diuretic agent like senna used historically to induce urination, the treatment itself does not interf all three: firstly with sulphur from an onion worm's head ("razi de la auriga"), secondly using small drops of holy water (as per medieval religious practices), and thirdly by kissing your lips together. Here I have translated to convey a traditional approach involving the use of common kitchen items like garlic, as well as symbolic or ritualistic elements such as onion worm heads ("auriga") for their purported healing properties in treating gastrointestinally related issues during medieval times—a reflection possibly indicative of folk medicine practices. The reference to kissing the lips together is a metaphorical way indicating closing or seal, which might symbolize finalizing treatment with an act believed by some traditions (perhaps spiritual) as healing in
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	When you stop the pointed cautery for a time on the affected part, there is relief only in that section which appears healthy again.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cauterization is that you apply the lancet directly to the tip of the patient' extramand, placing a small piece on the heel of their cap and in the temple where it corresponds with the length of the beard growth; hold your hand within until enough has been burnt out for treatment.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is how it works as a cautery and belongs specifically to barber surgeons; this form I present now.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	Mayhaps you have placed a little under that which scarcely was enough, and covered over in Lu with an excess of unnecessary bulkiness one more.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	When you care for the location where fluid is flowing currently within as it heals,
Capitol .vii.	Capitol .vii.: (The seventh section of this text or
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Translation for "Caute irure Antiquorum" regarding the ancient practice of cauterization in response to anaphylaxis:  
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	Translation for the provided medieval medical text on anaphylaxis treatment:  
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The translation of each line from Latin-influenced medieval medical text into English is as follows:
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has been cauterized on the stomach' extramandible (external part); and further, its healing is by water that proceeds from you.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol Book VIII (assuming "Capitol" refers to a
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	The treatment of forgetful pains caused by cold is through cauterization with fire or hot substances. This sentence suggests that medieval medical practitioners believed certain types of memory loss, which
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	 The covert pains are attributed to excessive cold consumed during meals and treated with grounding pillules (potentially indicating a remedy taken orally, possibly containing heating elements). Here, the term "jerras" might refer to certain foods that were thought to contribute extra heat when ingested. The medical
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	 Rest the head of the stomach and place your hand over it, immobilizing with a chest restraint described in the treatise on bandages (implying an intervention to stabilize or compress). This suggests that medieval medicine included techniques like physical constraints using devices such as crutches. The treatment for gout would involve applying heat directly through contact and possibly restricting movement, which aligns with historical practices
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	 After some periods of time, such that the application of cauterization begins (implying a cyclic or gradual treatment approach where heat is applied intermittently). This indicates an understanding in medieval medicine that treatments might require repeated applications over days to
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	 Then apply the second part of this measure as already described (reiterating a specific step or component within their treatment protocol). Here, they are likely referring back to another methodological aspect previously explained in their medical
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	So if for these sick individuals' healing; otherwise, apply three cauterizations in the lower part of their head (the forehead and nose area), which are considered to be located within that portion near the top but underne0439:512876+. Here they likely refer back to specific anatomical areas targeted for treatment with heat, focusing on a localized approach potentially aiming at balancing what was believed to be "internal humors" or fluids within these body parts during medieval times. The reference points towards the understanding of bodily regions that were thought significant in managing certain conditions like gout according to their medical beliefs and
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And between each application of cautery on the body part mentioned hereinabove, apply care for what comes forth from it.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you increase and the thigh is tolerating it well, then apply cautery at the warm spot on the limb; if your patient has a larger swelling, then causture that over both toes.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Care for that within which has been healed; and use the olive-oil as it is given by him/her.
Capitol .ix.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	This line translates into English as: "For the cauterization and softening of all parts of the body."  
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	When you process in the mindfulness of the head and apply what we have discussed; then heat that portion of the skull where there is a poultice or cautery to treat all heads (corns), as well as over the lower part, applying three cauterizations on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	If it is necessary in the mollification of the foot during gout, then apply those four cauteries to the vertebrae of the spine and insert them while making sure that discomfort from the neck moves away; raise the swelling as much as possible.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Return that which is within so it may heal, and this shall be olive oil treatment.
Capitol .x.	Capitol .x.: (This line appears incomplete or possibly missing
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	The Latin term "cauterize" refers to the medical practice of using heat, electricity, or chemicals to burn a
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	 The translated line indicates that instead of being subjected to caution (cauterization), the seizure is occurring due to "flegma," which historically refers to a thick phlegmatic or mucus-like substance believed by medieval
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	 The translation of the medieval medical text provided is as follows:  
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	If it is an infant who does not suffer from medicines, administer gout remedies and massaging tools to them through motion for several days, with the benefit of foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Here the text means: Return the head of the patient' extruded body part (assuming "malaute" refers to a protrusion or swelling in that area), and apply one caustic there where pain is occurring, as per previous indication; also place another cauterium on their forehead, and similarly burn each head corn with this instrument.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	If the humors are strong and bearable, then heat those points with a lancet where pain is present in order to cause paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the back and of the chest.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And if it is necessary for the pointed cautery (often oil-based) that follows.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	May it be that if the patient has a malady in their abdomen (maula), then delicate cautions are applied following this methodology.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi. (The original text does not provide additional
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	From "cauterize melancholy": In medical contexts from the medieval period, to 'cauterize' typically refers
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are rotten and moist (suggesting decay or impure conditions), it is necessary to apply these caustic substances that we have at hand, presumably for therapeutic reasons such as reducing paralysis. The text seems to be discussing an early form of treatment where certain potent materials might be used on the affected areas (possibly limbs) in a process similar today's cauterization or debridement procedures aimed at removing devitalized tissue and promoting
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	If the cause of melancholy is excessive and diminishing it leads to a decline in mental state (melancholia), where humidity accumulates within the limbs, then pour water that purifies one's mind as per previous instructions following division or separation. Here again we see an attempt at holistic treatment; by using cleansing substances like water—potentially through various forms of bathing practices common in medieval medicine—the physician aims to clear both the body and, metapthyically expressed within this context, also purify one's mind or emotional state.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Return his head under the waistbelt and lift it upward with forceps; hold that position until heating is applied to the area of the neck where you are holding onto him.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient's thigh is sixteen inches long and completely intact.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Return your pause with liniment; it is worthy of sheep' extruded balm.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	When it is heated over the flame for measured warmth, which causes them suffering when they are in there.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And place it in the heat location of their head at the circle's center, and make sure they are sweated out.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	When the leg is bathed throughout the week with a bath as per his regimen inside, or if you wish to, then anoint that small point on the flesh according to what has been decided; this type of cautery moistens the brain when balanced.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Return that bandage at the beginning or in places of linen gauze.
Capitol .xii.	Given that "Capitol" doesn'thy likely denote an article or
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	The phrase you provided, which appears to be in a medieval medical context and potentially Old Spanish with Latin influences ("de cauterizaço de agua descendente en le h
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When your lord declares the water consumption from his limbs during division and starts giving it to him through wine that purifies his head (which could be interpreted as a metaphor for cleansing or relief), he receives this drink, which helps in maintaining all humors within.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	When that medicine acts in a bath for acute days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	With the pointed cautery, I cut all veins and arteries wherein now lies the tendon; these are the cautions in that distance from the temple' extrication with a needle is performed herewith. (Here "Incideys am" means "I use", "cauteri totas las venas e arcerias" translates to cutting all veins and arteries, referring directly to vascular structures which may be affected by the
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	Watch for signs of bleeding when you are cauterizing; if blood flows from the wound, apply some medicine to it, which is within your possibility. (This line advises monitoring any sign of hemorrhage during cauterization and suggests treatment with available medicines.)
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	Bring forth the knowledge that you have in removing veins and addressing any potential bleeding, with care for signs of blood flow. (This line emphasizes bringing one's medical expertise to bear on safely managing venous removal while being vigilant about possible hemorrhage.)
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	There are some wounds that require to be cauterized at the joint of two bones, using dual implements designed for this purpose. (This line indicates a specific medical technique where multiple instruments may be used in conjunction to perform cautery on fractured or injured areas between bones.)
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol XIII - This likely refers to the section, chapter, article number
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On ancient teardrop cautioning or treatment methods. (This line suggests a focus on historical medical practices related specifically to managing tears—a
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When ancient tears are significantly present and observed to be excessive through fragile vessels wherein the head is located at its extremity and confirmed as superfluous by examining water cleansing in body's cavities within this chapter, then cauterize what has been previously recorded herein concerning aqua-cleansing methods for tears in bodies, along with caution of those vessels where they meet the skull’s extremity and at joint locations between bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	If there are ingestions of excess (indicating an imbalance or addition), then you will burn that in all parts of the belly over the upper region with small caulters.
Capitol .xiiii.	Given that "Capitol .xiiii." is not an actual text but
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	The phrase given appears to be a directive or instruction related to the medical treatment, likely in Latin-based terminology since it contains
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you as the healer neglect to treat that which we have discussed about in division and do not apply your medicine, then provide warmth to the affected area with hot coals for three nights; place it on top of their head (and) cauterize the swollen parts where pus is coming from.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Return that which is meant for cautioning, two lancets intended for puncturing are placed on the small spaces above each hair strand.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	Guard your tool of irons that does not pierce it through there.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	From this pointed instrument of cautery is this form.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of softening instruments for eyelid examination of patients.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the patient'thy eye is softened by illness or moisture, thereupon this part of it shall be treated with a luna-made cauterizer2. This constitutes its form3.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	If you, apply it on the two foreheads with a small piece of cautery in its entirety, and extend them from the nostribus (nostril openings).
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And according to the length of each cautery as per its surface area.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Do not press your hand too hard on the caustic, possibly according to how much the third part of the eyelid is dry or chapped.
Capitol .xvi.	The given line does not contain enough context or content for translation into English as it
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	From the provided fragment, we can infer that this line is likely referring to an ancient medical practice involving eye care (pertaining to 'cauterize' or cauterizing), where it mentions applying force with fingers ("puncho") on a patient when their hairs have turned into parts of instruments. However,
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the patient's hair turns into parts of instruments and I need to puncture or apply medicine burn in those areas (based on interpretation), it is done with two hands either for incision ("cauteria") or applying a healing concoction by fire, according to these dual methods. This translation attempts to convey the idea that when hairs transform into parts used during surgery and requires intervention using fingers ('pungo'), there are alternative procedures—either cutting (incision) with hands in two positions ("quar cauteria") or applying medicinal solutions prepared by
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If I need to cauterize with my hand ('cauteria'), command the humors in that individual, directing them such that their hairs come alongside those which are for washing; and if a finger is used instead of puncturing (“punho”), tightly wrap around it with bandages so as not to enter into these newly emerged threads ('nacsutz'). Herein lies the directive: first, cleanse by introducing appropriate humors. If one opts for incision using fingers rather than cauterization and removes any remaining hair (“lol naysement”), tightly secure with bandages such that no unwanted materials penetrate these fresh threads of body matter. This translation interprets a set of steps likely from an ancient medical text, suggesting treatment procedures involving the direct application or removal related to bodily fluids and filaments for healing purposes using hands and possibly external interventions like cautery with substances (often implied in historical texts). The language bl
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	So when women give birth and their maidens are present, the head of malady lies between the neck of the womb in the belly, and they place a hand over the eye lids of those serving them; this is the form of a mask worn by servants at wedddragons (a medieval festival), as well as part of their hairstyle.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Return your hand pressure above in an alcohol-based poultice or on millet paste over the rash.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Return the burning cautery used for this treatment (the form of it).
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And apply cauterization to the figure where the flesh is located, little by little and methodically, until the surface of the penis covered with juniper resin has been burnt off entirely in an obvious manner.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "The sign of sanity in a wound'thy hand is that thou holdest back thy eye, and thine hairs lifted high by their penetration.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And raise your hand and place it above the bed within which the shield shall be erected for three days.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	When that which is inside has been cared for and healed within it (inside), then take care of its surface so that what'thy once had in excess does not escape
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	When any hair returns due to their previous condition and the eye lid is soothed, you should then apply another treatment over that entire area as if it were your initial application.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the hairs are in the inner part of the eye lids, then they should be burned where it naturally resides and is protruding (eyebrows), so that the hair does not pierce through.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	May the cautery (medicine) be used here as you command the malady to pull its hairs inside where they are prolonged and entangled, and assign a fate of woolen cloth for this issue.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: E pause le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	When the atrophy wound is perceived, then apply that medicine and do so with your hand; when the cutting stops, wash it off with water from there or incision site—if you see openings in the eyelid while cleansing (which means they have been operated on), return to treat this area where no medicinal application has occurred yet and prevent its closure within which an operation is performed.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Place your pause above where the navel border is healed, and take care of that wax or another inside it which has been cured there as well.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	It is necessary for you to exercise great diligence so that in the night no harm comes from medicine; and if your eye lid becomes softened on certain days and causes problems with hair growth within it, then perform your treatment at this location where the eyelid has become softened, applying medication accordingly. In doing so, you will naturally alleviate these issues during mealtime, as well as ensure that whatever is inside remains contained.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is how one uses juniper oil (myrtle).
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	Even knowing that human humors vary according to size and smallness, therefore it is your contraction causing the issue.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	If it is not twisted along this path of excretion towards that individual whom you study in this art,
Capitol .xvii.	The provided text appears to be from an old medical manuscript discussing treatments for joint pain
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	When translating the line "Capitol .xvii.," it is not possible to provide an accurate translation without additional context because this simply appears as a reference or label, potentially from a specific section (denoted by ".x
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When treating a fistula that has been discussed in the divisions of diseases and without administers your treatment, you would then cauterize it following this method: command the malady to cease its efforts within itself (i.e., stop bleeding internally), hold onto any medicine between one's thighs with hands tightly gripped in such a manner that neither moisture nor restlessness occurs at their head, thus avoiding further aggravation or worsening of the condition while attempting to heal it.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Return your hand pressure or warmth in an oil blend, or soft padding made from wool over the body of him/her.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Return the cautery of which this is its form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Which is constricted like a cane or screwdriver at the part where the cautery acts.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	If you go inward into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	If you wish it shall come out with temptation.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	May it be better for that person in work when they rest or convalesce.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Return (or close) the fistula if it is opened, and with this remove from there all that sickness and filth within it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If it is not unbound (or released), then work on that and extract the prolapsed part from there.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Return the burning instrument to you and hold it in your hand that there is not a doubt between yourself or the patient's chest about where this tool belongs, so when applying pressure on the area of the inflamed intestine (or hernia), place small amounts at intervals using these instruments. Here is the translation line by line:
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if the caustic enters into the mouth and goes down to the bone, do so; but otherwise repeat the application of the caustic once or twice a week according to customary practice, leaving it there for three days, then rest over that spot with bordering bandages and send in liniments exsudated within while healing.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	May if they have passed these six days and are not healed, then the pause over this sharp acute medicine must continue until their bone is discovered and made smooth according to what suits them in their Capitol court.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula is healed by the water we have used from cautery and treatment, then it is; otherwise, you must administer medicine through the nose and reduce the fistula in its proper place when it comes forth at that time.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii. (The text seems incomplete here; "Capit
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	From the burning of the wound on the finger." This line suggests a medical procedure involving heat or fire to treat an injury, specifically referring to first-
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Repetitive acid attacks cause cracks in the lips, and mainly in children's." This sentence likely describes a condition where repeated exposure to an irritating substance (implied by "acid") results in physical damage manifesting as fissures or split sores on the lips
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So we talked about these cracks in the divisions and you're not treating it or refining your treatment as follows using a small lancet heat application:" In this line, someone is pointing out that there has been discussion regarding cracked areas (potentially referring to fissures on lips) without any effective intervention being applied. They are suggesting an approach involving the use of a heated lance-like tool for treatment—a method possibly derived from medieval or traditional practices where controlled heat was used as part of medical procedures, perhaps in minor wound care such as cauterizing small cut
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And so the cavity of it according to the subtlety of cloth." Here someone is implying that treatment should be done with precision and care, likely referring to a delicate approach or
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And so the initial coating applied with caution within those cracks whereby/the heated tool reaches the depth of said crack." This sentence suggests that a careful application is being made to address and possibly treat small, deep-seated or 'cracked' areas. The context implies this could be part of an effort to prevent infection while treating minor wounds—possibly referring
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And so the care applied within that which is healed." Here someone conveys that there should be continued or ongoing treatment (care) for an area once it has
Capitol .xix.	Capitol .xix.: (This line does not provide enough context for
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	The phrase "cauterization of a fistula in the mouth" refers to a medical procedure where heat or a chemical agent is applied to seal
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When the epithesis of the uvula or palate is inflamed, and fissures form that are painful (abscesses), they become both open sores/ulcers which worsen without proper care; as such, if you have these conditions—identified by heat cauterization according to what seems necessary within the ulcer itself for healing purposes. Apply therein the applied flame-cauterizing tool (appropriate quantity needed in the fissure) so that molten metal from it reaches the root of such lesions, and then place your hand inside until its heat permeates to where this burning element has descended into or below these areas. Continue doing so for either one day or two days; apply within those timeframes also care as previously indicated in our instructions (healing measures), enszyme-like substances that have been recommended by us, and maintain until the healed state is achieved without further complications.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	So if the illness is removed and healed, be well; otherwise, it's necessary to discover where the body has been rotted away and hold back bone fragments as they come forth in its cavity.
Capitol .xx.	Given that "Capitol" doesn'thy not provide specific
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	The provided Latin-like sentence translates to English as follows:
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the veins are softened by humidity and the teeth become decayed, treat those with medicine without attempting to cure them; at that time pause for your patient' extrication from behind their knees in bed rests, apply an ignited lancet according to its form so that you may stop bleeding there upon contacting it while entering into place of the instrument and fill this small space with warmth emitted by the fireplace beneath the head.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Return your hand (and) apply some of the caulters as you wish/require.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Here applies the mouth of saltwater to his/her mouth for an hour, and leaves it stuffed upwards, whereby the decaying teeth are closed down tightly and the soft gums become stiffened, while impure humidity is evaporated away.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol .xxi.: (The given text does not contain enough information
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Cauterization of tooth pain": This refers to the medical practice of using heat or a caustic
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to inflammation or infection, and the treatment does not comfort medicine, then caustic intervention at two places may be employed for healing": This sentence suggests that when a dental issue causes significant discomfort and conventional medical approaches fail to provide relief, alternative cauterization methods might be applied. These could involve using hot irons (like those used historically on large cattle horns) or focusing the heat directly where needed in order to alleviate pain through controlled burning of inflamed tissues as a treatment method within this medieval medical context.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Caustic application at the horn' extrusion is that you use the edges of cowhorns and sear them in heated metal hereby covering its extremity, as well as immersing what has been scorched from these bounds into heat so it may rest on top of the painful tooth within which burning occurs": Here, medieval medical practitioner describes a technique for using caustic substances derived from cow horns—searing them in metal and then applying this material directly over an extremity (presumably part of some dental or facial instrument) that is resting on the painful tooth. The aim seems to be not only immediate relief through direct contact with a burning agent but also possibly by embedding these scorched horn pieces into heat, which might serve as continuous localized treatment against inflammation within an abscess-like
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	Allow that repetition of the focused heat for several days until the virtue returns to the root of the tooth": This sentence advises allowing repeated sessions or applications where concentrated warmth (symbolized by 'foc') is directed at a specific point, which could be on topical pain relief like poultices. The imp
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	If you wish to do so, immerse wool or cloth below it there and place that above the sore tooth, and also over where the hot iron enters into the cavity of the decayed tooth until the iron reaches its point.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	Even though you are cauterizing the focus on the patient'thy thigh or iron, as long as there is any abscess and/or inflammation in their chest cavity that does not reach the mouth of the malady (presumably referring to an opening where fluids might drain out), continue with caution.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Return the cautery to its shape, and place it on your teeth so that the cautery becomes heated; this will provide some relief when the pain is severe or during that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	When that tool used by the malady spreads its jaws and holds your tongue for an hour, this is how it functions as a cauterium (cauterization instrument).
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And if you can manage it as per your ability, then apply heat with whatever is available that performs this function of heating and promoting circulation (likely referring to some form of hot pad or poultice).
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	Herein lies the method for catheterization, which implies a technique associated with inserting an instrument into bodily cavities. This medieval
Capitol .xxii.	This seems to reference "Capitol XXII," potentially indicating chapter or section
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of external protrusion, possibly referring to the treatment of an abscess (an infection that leads to a collection
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When external protrusion is due to cold humors that are not subside by medicine and you have only applied the poultice for this issue, take two thorns soaked in fire (the cauterizing agent) with which one can burn those parts where it has been placed. Hold a burning spit between both hands on each side of what needs to be treated – typically an abscess or similar condition that requires direct heat application and intermittent contact for healing, as the flame is applied alternately (and briefly), allowing time in between applications so new blood can reach the previously coo0led area. If necessary within this treatment process, enter where there remains a wound to continue applying warmth until it fully clears – following these steps ensures that you are heating and possibly disinfecting without causing further harm or igniting surrounding healthy tissues unnecessarily.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the ulcer is small, pause the application of the cautery according to the size of the ulcer; apply it for three days and rest over the heated area until such time that what has been ignited by the focus has burnt out.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	When that person is cared for with wax and threads and cloths within which they shall be healed,
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The translation of this medieval medical treatise line by line into English would be as follows:
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol .xxiii. (This line appears as an annotation or reference
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	The phrase "de cauterizacio de rauquiera de vox et de constriccion de ala" in English translates to:
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity comes upon the lungs and primarily when there is heat congestion in the body, then it's necessary that phlegm be expelled from the chest with medicinal cathartics, and apply a caustic to the area where congestion occurs.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	When you reach not with the cautery for gout nor burns on your patient'thy navel, but a few drops.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And treat that joint with another lancet for proper ligation of the knee' extrinsic vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The pointed cautery of it cuts in a manner previous.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Return that which is necessary for healing has entered where it was before; let this be cured as such follows afterward.
Capitol .xxiiii.	The text provided seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise with language rem
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	In the context of treating chest illness and cough, this line suggests that there is some form of intervention or procedure being referred to for addressing these ailments:
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When chest cold and lung disease are caused by humidity invasion, as there is no fever or spleen malady (antique illness), then two forms of cauterization should be performed: one on the sternum bone at points where ribs join to breat each other; another in between breastbones. These burn wounds are made according to their shape as preceded by earlier practices, indicating a methodical approach tailored to specific anatomical sites for treatment of respiratory conditions during medieval times:
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	If you wish, your cautery points will be the same as those which are called for pain in arthritis (of joints), whereby these forms come before when puncturing for this purpose.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And if points are inside them, and care is provided for those that entered before so they may be healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	Already, you have three lances for cauterization here; as per this form, you can perform three such cauterizations.
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol .xxv. (The ".xxv." likely refers to
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Based on the fragment provided, it seems you're referring to a Latin-based phrase that involves some form of medical treatment or procedure—possibly related to "cauterizing" (which
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the helper's head is dislocated due to lubricating humors and does not stay in place upon your return home, within which time it naturally returns according to its usual course of action—as we have testified—after you first reduce (correct) the displacement, take measures such that once more shifted by movement like our own actions, whereby with initial reduction having been performed on the helper'thy neck located in between their shoulder blades or below as per your right side if dislocated at these lower points; and raise this collarbone which is positioned within the parts of the skull that are above those mentioned herein.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Return (or apply) fire or heat to the pointed end of the cautery, and this is how it works.
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And apply a cautery inside where that enters into another, and there will be seen the figure of cautioning after applying other cauteries;
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus he acts according to the amount of effort; this is how it happens:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	E some adjustments are made according to this count and for these reasons, there are eight lances (cauteries).
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Return the pressure above the points on the cautery and make sure to attach the humors (body fluids) firmly so that none of its parts will become excessively hot for any time while comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If dislocation occurs above and below the area in question, then apply a caustic to the muscle with either a chisel or cauterizing points on them; thus confirming the joint, reducing humidity, and healing the malady.
Capitol .xxvi.	The text provided appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De cauterizacio del stomac.	From your Latin phrase, "Capitol .xxvi.," it seems like you are referring to the twenti
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	Translation of the provided medieval Latin medical text regarding stomach treatment:
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	If the depth of the caustic corresponds to the quantity of both thighs of the pubis,
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	If the form of this instrument is such as it currently has, and if you wish to perform a large cauterization at the stomach area according to this shape, then that will be a cauterium in the shape of a circle following this structure.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to burn the stomach with that lancet you are afraid of, and thus your hand will be on the stomach according to what you wish to attempt, and similarly cauterize at those points which have already been subjected to this treatment; take care for such a person so as they may recover.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol .xxvii.: This line seems like an annotation or reference within a
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	From "capitol" we can deduce that this may be referencing Roman law, as Capitolium was the Temple of Jupiter
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When joint pain occurs in the foot due to moisture or dryness within its usual position from excessive discharge, and it is cured with water that we have provided them without causing additional comfort, then when the malady rises up onto the patient's backbone (cervix), three caustic treatments are applied according to this manner and quantity by the homeopath.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	Where each space between them is according to the size of said instruments and where those same tools follow along with the length of the body'dictively:
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not use your pointed instrument for cutting with it.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	If the amount of fluid that has entered is equal to or greater than the capacity of what was collected from the cushion, and it's not adjusted; if the uterine mass remains on their feet, they will swell, which already have extended their limbs, raise your breasts.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	When it is possible that you will use these caustics for cauterizing the skin surface when you are under subtlety and prudence in your art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	When you do not process in the cauterization and it is hardened throughout the entire spine to enter into the bubbles (which here refers to blisters or similar formations), understand that this point lies below, wherefore caution should be exercised; know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii. (Note: The reference "Capitol
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	From the puncturing of apendicitis with a lancet. ("Apostema" in this context likely refers to appendicitis, and "fieat
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When you want to know if the inflammation (apostema) is in the flesh of the body or in its covering (tunic), if it's located in the flesh of the body, the malady weakens and causes more pain. ("Maladie" here refers to an illness/disease condition such as appendicitis.)
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If it is in the breeches (pants), the pain is great and occurs often, already fatiguing doctors with its treatment.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore when the ulcer is positioned over the pubic bone; and where the lesion of the sore should be attempted to heal, this tool that was previously described on another page has been assembled for use with cautery.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And anoint that and apply the caulcerations inside until they reach the bladder, until diseased flesh turns into ashes.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Return that for healing as well by means of other applicators within which it is being cured.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	Only use that form of cautery which has been studied in the art of medicine and is used more for these illnesses; perhaps we may try some experiment with this method here, but always obey our doctors' orders and follow their advice.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol .xxix. (The ".xxix." could refer to
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Certainly! Here's the translation for "Cauteirzación del lumeio" into English:
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Cauterization of ulcers according to this method involves taking a dry rachet (likely referring to an instrument for cauterizing wounds) and using it on a lengthy purulent lesion found in the described location, which is presumably related to aristology or ancient lore. Here's what each part means:
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Here's the translation line by line:
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And when purchasing your hand for use with the points of the needle, it appears in the work of the spine.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And already dispatched are those arts that in some way resemble iron rods and flame-like substances; place them where they lie between the patient'dict backbones', so long as they arrive at that wound, being healed therein just like how we treat a child.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	May not fear in this incision for the wound that will be left unsanctioned here.
Capitol .xxx.	Given that "Capitol" doesn'thy not provide enough
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	From the puncturing of the womb (or uterus). The Latin phrase suggests a medical procedure involving an incision or inter
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you are caring for the illness of the womb (uterus), if you do not use what has been mentioned as necessary in division and healing without providing it yourself, then there will be three or four kinds of cauterization done properly according to which I have previously shown. These methods all adhere strictly; specifically:
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Between each lancet used or a small sharp instrument, and between them is our glove handling; that's what we have been doing in the instruments of the foot handled with hands.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not put your hand in the caulcer with the lancet; and the malady is above its two (i.e., over both areas).
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	Here comes another method of cauterization so that you heat the cautery with two senses, which causes tendon displacement at the shoulder joint head (this refers to dislocation), and holds onto the neck where the spine is close to the spleen root in the lower part of the body.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And if it is your raising that you are referring to which lifts the penis according to the length of the body, so they shall be branded in accordance with the law of the cosmos.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Once they have joined together both garments and belt (the two outerwear items), in that space where their bodies intersect each other inside the waistband of the other item, place them properly to avoid friction between these parts which could cause harm.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Return the points of the cautery; hence they perform four acts of cautery.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	If you go, then perform three types of cautery as have been done.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And for your treatment with the applied cauteries that have been left in place for days, it may also indicate other preceding causes of healing.
Capitol .xxxi.	The given text appears to be an extract from a medieval medical treatise discussing
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	In order to address this line for translation, it seems there may have been some confusion or typo in the original Latin-
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	The corrected sentence appears to be discussing medical practice related to treating dropsy (now often referred to as edema, which is swelling caused by fluid accumulation in the body's
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you care for dropsy by applying the four kinds of treatments as have been divided and not confined within your own treatment scope; at that time there are four cauterizations in the course (or channel) around the embryonic area, one on the stomach, another on the limb(s), yet another between the vertebrae of the backbone, a caustic along the spine's midline, and two more across or within each intervertebral disc space.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	The quantity of the depth of the cautery is proportional to the sharpness of the bone, which means that how deep you use the pointed instrument (cauterization) depends on the hardness or sharpness of the patient'thy bones. Here’s a
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Then return and use the caustic up to such an extent that you can maintain continuous application for long periods, which indicates careful monitoring of how much heat is applied through the instrument with a pointed end (cauterization) in order not to cause
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	Do not expel the malady from curing through caustic that is heated over fire so it can be added to your treatments as directed (therapy), and if necessary on feast days, for aid with recovery (`ajouter` referring possibly to a special diet or additional care). Here `cautery am aquo`, which in English would translate literally into "heating the caustic over water," refers metaphorically perhaps to preparing it as required before application. The mention of feast days might indicate traditional timing for
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the caustic used to burn inside (the abdomen) is as follows: it must be shaped according to what was done previously, and that same shape is also for when both hands are cauterized following their respective previous forms (`desus precedent`), which may refer back or maintain a specific form based on prior treatments. Here `es desug` refers possibly to taking inspiration from how something (the caustic) was previously used, shaped by the practitioners' customs and experiences with it; there is an emphasis not only in applying past knowledge but also adapting treatment forms (`forma`) according
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol Book XXII suggests this particular volume of a larger work, potentially
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of foot puncturing and hernia treatment.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are planted in wet places and become swolthy with water that is between the earlobe (auricular) and the ring finger (annular), cauterize the feet on both sides immediately, raise your hand holding the cautery without twisting it; then lift up your hand furthermore, but do not return to where you started—the water retreats.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line:
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate line by line into English:
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And let it be cured for a long time so that any water does not come out of it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Return care for those causes which have been mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	I apologize for any confusion, but without additional context or knowledge of what 
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of intestinal bleeding treatment (Note: This translation is an educated guess based on the fragment provided and common medical terminology
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the intestine is affected by froth and moisture that can dislodge worms, these are digestive retentions within the stomach and belly (bellies), which when treated with healing waters without causing further harm prevent you from seeing them. Sometimes this bloated area may display intestinal parasites; in such cases, there is a great cauterization over its abdomen as per previous treatment of the stomach itself or after curing and not allowing to come out (likely referring back to removal procedures), including small-scale cauterizations within all four quadrants undernepective delicately; also with needle punctures on large areas beneath ribs, two forms of internal causticization: one over the abdomen above hips and another involving dual applications.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	If you see the humors rising excessively and overflowing from within, then apply cautery to that area on the belly and over the buboes (abscess-like swellings), firmly adjusting the instruments of cautery upon the stomach and above the genitals; this is curative for health where there was no deficiency.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capitol .xxxiv. (The given text does not provide further context
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Caustic treatment of ancient ulcers." This line refers to the use of caustics, which are substances with a chemical property that can destroy or remove
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When in nature there are old ulcers caused by thick humors or corrupted moisture and they cannot be healed without treatment as divided into three caustics applied on the pus spots at once, and dipped below the navel with two drops." This line from a medieval medical treatise outlines an approach to treating chronic ulcers believed to result from thick bodily humors or moisture that has become corrupted. The treatment involves:
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If the patient's stomach is inflamed and their food has not been digested, or if they have wounds that are bandaged repeatedly, then perform such an extensive cauterization on the stomach with a large cautery as preceded; also apply one cauterium to the chest, another to the mouth (presumably for treating sores), and furthermore ensure these instruments remain applied for some time until care is taken that they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Given that "Capitol" doesn'thy not provide any text for
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	The phrase in question appears to be from the medieval medical context, likely referring to some form of treatment involving coagulation or chemical burns ("cauterize") for an inguinal hernia (the term
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you excise the hernial sac ("excise" is implied by "abscindes"), then apply to it (which) the caustic that has been prepared on the flame of your device, typically an open fire or early crucible-like apparatus. Here '
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Introduce that caustic within the hernial entrance you have excised (which I interpret as referring to reintroduction of a substance), and lastly place your hand inside so it reaches whereby those cauterizing agents arrive at the vein through which blood drains from this area. Here '
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Make of two or three pots (possibly referring to containers for preparing substances), provided they are not too large; these should be brought when you have finished recounted and noted them, taking care that those who will confine the grease inside so it remains until their healing is complete. Here '
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you apply a great caustic to an inguinal hernia (which I interpret as suggesting treatment of the condition), it may happen that this is better in strength or intensity for its healing effects. Here '
Capitol .xxxvi.	When referring back to "Capitol" and using context clues, we
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of the purging or burning out of abscesses that are flesh in nature, occurring within the parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work we have recommended in that place and the patient is frightened by it, they are healed through caution (careful treatment).
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	So when any one comes out through the nature today and it is old and diseased by wetness or corruption of fluids within, then only those who are worthy may investigate subtly beneath that which has been attempted to reach here before, taking into account the depth of this investigation.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Return the cautery that seems like fire (or is being used as if it were).
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Return that burning cautery herein, and according to how much it enters into the attempt.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Here repeats the use of caustery within which they burn those parts that have become quickly decayed after one or two diets (meals), according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Return care for the place where it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the place is sealed off, and materials have been removed from it for a long time, you know that the patient has fully recovered.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the substances are not removed from under you (the patient), then understand that they penetrate into your pelvis or pregnancy area and cause these issues, which will be remembered at this location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Based on the provided medieval medical context and vocabulthy that crosses Latin with
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	The line "Capitol .xxxvii." in a historical or technical document would typically refer to an item number
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When there is pain in the joints due to friction or severe wind, and as a result of this discomfort arises from the malady (likely referring to an illness causing these symptoms), one should cauterize that area over each knee with instruments meant for such treatment. This procedure not only alleviates immediate pain but also serves as mnemonic aid in recalling their purpose and proper use, possibly related to historical medical practices or specific therapeutic rites where detailed remembrance was essential due to the intricate nature of these interventions which might have been less understood.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And when we apply caustic in the second small doses, three lines of liniment will serve and thus may restore previous vigor.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Given that this medieval text is not in standard Latin but rather incorporates elements of multiple
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	The translation for "Capitol .xxxviii." without additional context or sentence structure could be challenging, as
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When an infection clears and inflammation reduces due to heat and moisture that prevent the urine retention within the bladder; at that time you would perform cauterization on the part of the pus present in the bladder, using hair from around its pelvic region as well as a third instrument for treatment located in the seventh section (possibly referring to another body area or an organ), with yet another tool positioned on one'thy side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each caustic according to the number of notes on the foot; and burn that which is a second caustic in the lower part of the leg or two such if necessary for treatment.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And when it is necessary for the pointed cautery (or lancet) that has been used thus far in the process, then proceed as follows.
Capitol .xxxix.	The Latin-influenced medieval medical text appears to be a set of instructions
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	And when it comes time for the lancet in use (referring back to previous steps), then proceed as directed
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When the pain and moisture enter into/within (the womb), it is forbidden to perform enema procedures thereof; as such these impurities corrupt menstrual discharges from her body, delaying their onset of labor pains – which she must endure due to this state. Moreover, the location where intervention should take place with a lancet (three in total within/about the womb's circumference), or two upon that spot near and following after each other; alongside such main cauterization instruments as her enema tool – positioned just below it using said tools. When at those precise locations where intervention is carried out with lancets (three in total within/about the womb'dictated by its natural curve), or two upon that spot following each other, thus carrying on for three cauterizations altogether; and these are known as main cautioning devices herein described.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol .xl. (This line appears to be an identifier
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	The treatment of the detachment of the urethra, commonly referred to in historical medical texts as "Caustic Cautery for Urethral Detachment." This suggests
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture seeps out of the urethra and into its location, causing humidity-related issues therein, it is referred to as a "prolonged catheter." This implies that when comparing these two parts (the one with an inserted tube for urine drainage—likely referring to a Foley catheter) versus the other part of their body not subject to such treatment, they appear prolonged or stretched out due to presence and positioning.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The location of the dislocation is being stretched here.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Now when you cauterize the patient'dictum (probably referring to an injury or wound) over the division of their thighs with a pointed tool for semblance, place that and have in hand as if they are being twisted within this area, so that the part divided may fall into its resting spot at the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And it is the same instrument used for stomach cauterization that was previously employed in its form herein described.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this cauterization is not with you now, then use three large cautery pieces instead of the one at hand.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When using the points according to the quantity of all the needles, take care that it enters into which has healed.
Capitol .xli.	Capitol .xliv (Note: The Roman numeral system is being
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	The phrase "cauterization of the sciatic nerve" refers to a medical procedure where heat or a chemical agent is applied to the
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain is felt in the thigh and it'sinferred cause of blood stasis and dampness, doctors use what they have for this purpose to not worsen the condition (implying that no intervention should be taken if nothing exists). These may refer to poultices made from natural materials or artificially created pills; these are applied here. The text suggests using a form of cauterization on whatever contains those bad humors in large quantities, possibly implicating the presence and treatment of conditions like an abscess (infected pocket where fluids collect) which could involve swelling ('pillulas fetidas').
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The second use of cautery is either medicine-burning or flame (cauterization).
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Here are the translations line by line:
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And as for the spaces between each lancet, determine their quantity and size of that body part they correspond to (cauterization or large).
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	May there be some lubrication over the wound on top of the head for which four cauters are used.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	If you wish, then cauterize the circle around which form was sought in the cauterization of the displacement of the ankle; and if it'thy a closed space that needs burning out completely throughout the entire knee joint.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is how it happens when pain adheres to the chest and does not extend into the groin area with cautery.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	May it be extended into the thigh, then apply those two caulters on the thigh where you will insert that malady causing pain – and one lancet for every four parts of this outer body section to take care of its portion.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	If the depth of the pointed cautery reaches according to the length of the belt (cordon), then:
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	If the malady spreads and causes pain within these parts of the feet, then here they will perform cautery at this spot where it has entered you, possibly for three or four points or as required by that ailment.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If the malady spreads pain into these areas when you press down on them with your hand, then here is where one should apply an intestinal or hernia cautery (cutting instrument).
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	Here comes the first source sentence: And as for you in your entirety of cautioning or severe branding that does not go beyond numbing painful nerves or large arteries, and due to this is over the patient'thy navel without any obstruction unwittingly.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already seen others who were cauterized on the bone and finally in the act of cauterization, their focus is within where the swelling has reached the flesh, with an inflamed bed that pierces and ruins all parts of it.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	When severe vomiting occurs from excess stomach heat, apply cool water and restore its vitality (life force).
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain is in two parts of attachment, then do one-by extrication according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Here enters another third (another piece), and that space between them is the quantity of notes from each footnote; these circles are opened by two parts, their length being a note or two in those margins—this is how it appears.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Return it is lit within the fire wherein it becomes blackened and ash-covered; place it upon the division of the groin, with malady covering its lapels (belly flaps).
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	So then you will cauterize that limb with three cautery instruments in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis: Oh children, of this particular type of cauterism we seldom use to avoid looking at him/her (the patient), and so only a few have discovered what observes over the individual.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	May those who endure with you use these lancets herein provided for their suffering, and they will be spared this location by them.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	May cautery, which are part of the medicines that you have at hand (especially if your instrument' extruded through a hole in its handle), serve as two circles formed by this protrusion: their length corresponds to either two knots or quays on their legs.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	If the space between what you have mentioned is related to the quantity of their body mass; and they are loose below and above them in this manner that it contains itself within its bounds.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	When you lift your hand as the tool, and wipe away all the water down from its entire length of wetness.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return care for that which is inside has entered with wax (or healing substance), and ensure its preservation, holding it within so as not to let the treated entity escape or
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain extends into the hip or groin area, place a statue in there that contains water as it is formed within the abdomen (belly). This suggests applying cold compresses made with liquids such as water for localized inflammation and discomfort associated with gout. The medieval approach here seems to involve using colder substances like wax or ice, conceptually similar in purpose but not exactly aligned with modern medical practices which favor cooling methods without invasive
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the method of applying water as a remedy (or treatment), and I have already written about it in the treatise on medical correction/diagnosis restoration techniques, implying that this approach to using cold substances like wax for gout pain was recognized within their documented practices. It underscores how even back then there were structured approaches—even
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Mix baking soda and vinegar in equal parts of one portion has been divided into two or more compartments; place the separated divisions back together until a new phase forms wherein previously joined portions have perforated due to internal pressure, depending on how much is placed inside. This medieval recipe likely refers to an age-old experiment using baking soda (alkali) and vinegar (acid), which reacts chemically when combined in water—producing carbon dioxide gas that can cause the "perforated" or separated divisions of a container, like two glass jars connected by their lids
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Pause after the formation of another phase in which water (from internal pressure) rises and divides into two parts, place wet baking soda and vinegar on top—this rising or "fountain" action draws up these substances as if by a suction. Then use those collected for good compression treatment; apply the hand that yields this water quickly from underneath to where it previously divided above in order not to let any more come out, indicating an attempt at containing and possibly soothing inflamed joint areas associated with gout through manual pressure using natural concoctions made of baking soda (alkali) mixed with vinegar. This method aligns somewhat traditionally—before the widespread use of modern anti-inflammatory drugs, people often used physical methods to manage inflammation and pain from conditions like gout.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	So of the various remedies among which they are being treated, apply heat and honey mixture herein so that these mix together for medicinal purposes.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	E Gualia recounts from an ancient home the operation and care for which a person is healed of hip and sciatic pain, and it' extrinsically brings great benefit to be this way; as they need no other cure besides what has been recommended herein—provided that one bathes well and exercises regularly.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And if it is caused by certain biliary stones (cholelithiasis), or if not expelled and causing pain in the area of discomfort, cut off a piece of gray iron about the size of a hazelnut; place this fragment on the joint where there's pain, whether that be at the hip, thigh, or leg.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	Where it has been laid out for three hours or until the accumulation of rheum in the joint subsides (depending on its quantity).
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Return that part of it in bath and when the patient'thy leg is washed, place that back into its position within you; therein lies relief from pain and healing begins.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	E understand that it is not for your sake which you employ these instruments, but rather to facilitate the expulsion from the body (evacuation).
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	May Socrates say that when the vein of a goat is cauterized, it affects its blood; and these are the methods for such procedures: wool or linen soaked in antidote oil, placed between the toes and between the bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Return and do not cease doing so until the venom from the knife reaches within the joint, at which point stop the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this act of cautery is called instruments or tools for drainage (or cupping).
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol .xliii. (Assuming there's a typographical error
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	In this line, the text appears to refer to treating two kinds of pain or injury using some form of caut
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains occur in two places due to various causes such as hunting or being struck by an object, and for reasons similar to those (the context is not clear without the full text), through the infusion of moist substances with putrefied materials. Here's a possible interpretation: The pain might be happening at two different locations because these are either from activities like pursuing game or being hit by something, as well as for reasons that seem similar to those cases (perhaps related to impurities), and the treatment could involve infusing moisture mixed with decayed matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And with this very specific type of puncture, which is caused by effusion of humoral fluid, we will not make cuts but instead use cautery here only for treatment purposes.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	So then, for the evacuation of the malady through pill-stuffed and resembling vessels that are three lines according to its course, place a cauter in any one line with as much force as they tolerate from both the malady'dictions within them and their vitality.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And it is necessary for a point of pain to be treated with pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, then perform three or four cautions with pointed instruments on this particular form.
Capitol .xliii.	Given that "Capitol" is not providing any text for translation but appears as
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	The line provided, “Capitol .xliii,” does not give enough context or content to translate directly into English meaningfully. It seems like a reference that
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	 The provided line appears to discuss the management of gout in children and suggests that caution is necessary when dealing with this malady among young ones; specifically, it mentions a need for restraint over their body structure during daytime activities or exercise periods as they grow taller (referring possibly to physical activity). Here's an attempted translation into modern English:
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And in the lower part of the backbone and between his legs that is already starting to overtop the others vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you press and intend to prevent it from spreading further, then apply that pointed instrument of cautery in this manner:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	That applies the cautery over the entire vertebral region of the spine.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	If you wish, perform cauterization in the vertebral column with one or two lines of points on the puncture (cauterization).
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	These are already made points between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Return care for the location inside where it has been healed with what we have given you.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	May it not be applied in a gummy or cold state, but for muscle spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol .xliv. (The given text does not provide further content
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	From the context of these lines, it appears that this is about treatment for gout and joint pain:  
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	So when gout is cured as a result of the doctor'sin treatment and there are no more pains remaining, then apply bandages without delay.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	When you are cauterizing that which is expelled within the joint passage of the foot and thigh, with your cautery instruments.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	That is the form of this instrument: (here referring to a pointed heated tool used for medical purposes)
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then use a pointed cautery for that purpose.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If pain enters the joints or other connections, and motion disturbs them, then you must cauterize that area with three or four of these cauters throughout the entire body for this specific purpose.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If you need to use caustics and these are necessary for you, then apply them only where they are needed without pressing too hard with your hand on the tool previously used; do this solely by inserting a small piece of sponge into the catheter beforehand.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If pain enters between them and both legs, then apply the previously mentioned cautery as directed in our chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If the pain is only in the feet and it calls for sweat (indicating inflammation or fever), then a piercing occurs along the meridians where circulation happens; this involves making points on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If there remain pains in the fingers or thumbs, then make a point on the circumference of each joint over every knuckle and the pad of the palm; this is where they hold their hands.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If joint or muscle pain occurs during the days in hips or legs, then you will cauterize all parts of assistants' bodies.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And if the bowels are not expelled properly through good regimen and medicine intake, even a well-executed drain with this instrument may heal, thanks to God'setup:
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol .xlv. (This line seems like it might be referencing
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	The translation of "Cauterizacio de rompectedura" into English, based on the context provided and assuming
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When the rupture occurs in the joints and when you apply burn wicks along with a belt around the waist, doctors commence to act as ordered; they instruct diet for that day aiming at calming reasons so that the intestinal opening may not reopen from within.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And follow the thighs between your legs on their two sides, and command that they hold their breath so that an opening or a hernia appears in their navel area or intestines protrude outwardly.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Return that back to the thighs and neck, attempt not to break through the bones of which form the end of this limb segment resembling the base of a circular section in its divisions within the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Return with fire the cautery of which this is its form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	When it is necessary and appropriate for a request or petition to be made with needles (or possibly pinwheels), we proceed as follows:
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity, and place your hand over the area to ensure that the intestine does not protrude outwards.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: You have already opened between the patient'thy thighs and placed a cushion under them; another servant has been put on their legs, and another is resting on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe carefully the state of the intestine during your cautery procedure to ensure that it does not leak into the groin area and cause serious harm or other grave consequences.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	When you understand that when you hold the cautery, you are not touching your bones, thus not completing your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And when it is necessary for children'thy small caulters (cautery tools) according to their greatness and measurement,
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Return care for the site of the cautery within three days or until the wound has healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return that for its care so it may heal within them (inside).
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The joint (or limb) is swolthy with pus for forty days until the location and crowd are sealed off:
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	When nourishment is withhidered from the patient according to the length of time during their treatment and thus helps tighten the belly without forcefully aiding in healing, take immediate action as necessary for recovery.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	When it is time for removal after forty days, administer the ligature tightly (and use that same ligature for another fourteen days).
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	If it is from excessive labor and replication of foodstuffs and drinks, as well as with intense use when this entire healing regimen is applied, then:
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And those who were among the first that have cut their wound with a trilateral (triangular) lancet are now displayed as if they had been attempted.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol .xlvi. (This line seems like it's referring
De cauterizacio de torcio.	The phrase "de cauterizacio de torcio" refers to a medical procedure involving the use of
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain persists in the extremities for a long time and does not improve with conventional medical treatment by physicians, it is necessary to perform cautery on points (points of soreness). This suggests that they believe applying heat or using friction can alleviate chronic joint pain. Here's the translation:
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And with pointed instruments for each member according to their size and growth, as well as the location of twisting and pain in it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if it heals through the first application of heat therapy (cauterization), then; but if not, repeat over it with these same applications until those areas connect to where the ailment affects the body part that comes into contact with it, so as for continued treatments within this malady' extruding place.
Capitol .xlvii.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise with some
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of leprosy treatment." (This line indicates the subject or topic of discussion, which is likely related to
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	And sometimes heavy wounds require strong caution for healing, and lightly if the species of leprosy is due to decomposition of fat and melancholy." (Here it suggests a treatment method where severe injuries might need more robust therapeutic approaches while less serious cases possibly linked with psychological factors like 'melancholy' require milder interventions. The connection between the condition, leprosy in this case, is made through historical belief linking mental states and physical health outcomes.)
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Therefore, when you intend to caustically treat that one, consider if the leprosy is mixed and what has been previously mentioned for healing as part of division—and not here nor there; and worry about corruption affecting the entire body and complexity alike. In this case, apply it atop the head with cauterization: on top where hair meets skin (at or behind the skull), between two folds of flesh below [which may refer to underarm regions], over both shoulders; each above a joint—on one shoulder's pus and its counterpart beneath. And also, apply it at back relative to neck or sinews: on top where skin meets bone." (This detailed instruction outlines the precise locations for applying cauterization as part of leprosy treatment in medieval times according to their understanding—focusing not just on isolated areas but considering systemic health. The treatments are tailored based on specific body parts and joint types, showing a targeted approach consistent with medical practices from that era.)
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy has already spread over the thigh and shows a manifestation, then cover it with those cauterums you have in your head; apply them to the extremity of the nose, two on each leg's womb (uterus), two on either spine of the chest, one great for both spines linked together above the belly button region, and another over the shoulder blade. Also place cauterums:
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	When it comes to your nerves that are above the heel and do not burn them, pay attention herein described below:
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And in some cases it is cauterized with a pointed instrument on the patient' extrémité pelvienne and another above the mouth of the stomach, and another over the genitals.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	Here is the line-by-line translation of the medieval medical treatise:
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	When it is necessary for the cauteries (irons or similar tools) to be large or small according to the body parts and joints, as indicated by what has been provided with these instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Return care for the cautions with barley flour made of worms and honey, as well as other curative measures within which it shall be healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	The provided text appears to be from an old medical treatise discussing various aspects of joint
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Regarding "cauterization for stupefaction," it seems like this line refers to a method
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any member is struck or put to sleep and heals not with medicine, nor remedies applied by physicians (doctors), but requires a caustic for treatment according to the magnitude of that part or its smallness; there you apply such cauterization as it may require.  
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And when they insert the pointed cautery into the neck of the corpse, it means that a specific procedure or action involving medical instruments (in this case, 'pointed cautery') is being performed on ('into
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And take care for them inside where they are healing to maintain their health and recovery process properly. This line emphasizes the importance of attending to those who are recuperating,
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	Occasionally they perform cauterization on someone who is in an altered state of consciousness (potentially referring to sedation or unconscious), particularly affecting the feet and spinal disks between thoracic vertebrae T2-T5, along with nerve roots at those levels. Afterward, they reassure that this intervention helps restore normal sensation in these areas by easing any numbness caused before (implied). The sentence outlines a specific medical procedure—likely the cauterization of nervous structures to alleviate symptoms such as pain or
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	No apply a poultice to the wound, but rather that person who is skilled in the dissection of limbs and nerve exit throughout the body's mobile parts—implying an expertise necessary for proper diagnosis or treatment when dealing with such injuries where direct intervention isn’n always possible. This phrase advocates seeking professional help from someone knowledgeable about human anatomy
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol XLIX, suggesting a specific section of documentation in Roman times or perhaps
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Caustic treatment for hematemesis—this refers to the use of caustics (potentially chemical agents) as a medical intervention aimed at address
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When ancient barriers are present and do not suffice for the linens of medicine that have been previously used (to refer to medical dressings), then cauterize over those points before they get moistened again where it has become wet, changing its color—suggesting a situation in which there is an urgent need to re-treat or sterilize the area as needed. This might involve using heat (perhaps with caustic substances) directly on wounds that are already at risk of becoming infected due to exposure, changing colors from clean white linens back into discolored ones—indicating soiling and potential contamination which requires immediate attention through cauterization.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
Capitol .l.	The text provided appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Cauterization of the skull, or "cauterização del cráneo" in Spanish which translates
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer spreads and that star rises, then you must perform a circular incision in the area where it is turning or twisting (possibly referring to an abscess formation). This implies using cauterization with a heated instrument like forceps ("am cauteri") within the infected region. The translation retains some of the older medical terminology and syntax, indicative of medieval times' approach towards describing procedures for treating diseases such as
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	I examined those parts that have been previously treated by burning (am lo derier cauteri), and perhaps I am not able to see anything there myself; yet fear may arise because it might be ulcerated, although some signs are visible already. This line further elaborates on the physician's observations post-cauterization—specifically that parts treated with heat (likely referring to thermal cauterization) have been observed for potential healing or complications like an open wound ("ulcerat"). The phrase reflects a common medieval medical concern where physical signs were critical in diagnosing and planning
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is noted that the part has been previously burned in a circular area within this location (am circuito), either with pointed instruments ("motze") or through other means of heat application like bellows-induced flame for cauterization, which they might have applied here. This indicates an understanding and documentation practice present during that era where the methodology used was crucial to their medical
Capitol .li.	Capitol (likely referring to a head or crown region)—
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Cauterization of the abdomen, often due to conditions like acute appendicitis in medieval times ("adube
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When anyone is delayed in their growth, and so it's due to the excess flesh or because of the state of the humors within them (being feeble-minded with few sanctions), or because of time itself, you wish to hasten their maturation; then cauterize that which will satiate in its growth cycle using small puncture cauteries. 
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you wish to perform the burning of it for caution, then heat that instrument which is this form (likely referring to a cauterizing tool), and bake it where nutrients enter into circulation within so that the sinew may not penetrate further.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the applied points in that location are kept for so that the leg' extricates itself (assuming this refers to addressing issues like cramps or spasms); and take care of what is healed therein.
Capitol .lii.	Given that "Capitol" is not provided as part of an actual
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	From your fragmented input, it seems you are referring to a treatment involving caustic application in medicine; this was
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	When there is active decay within the limb (corruptive process), it consumes you as if dry kindling were chewing upon your bones at the bedside fireplace. The caustic application, therefore, serves to cauterize or burn this corruption out with precision and care akin to extingsion of flames from wood in need
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Thus if you encounter the decay in its location where caustic has been applied at the focal point (the focus of treatment), then apply cauterization with small pieces of wood, and large ones as necessary for that specific site where there is rot to eradpective. The use here symbolizes a metapthyical approach using heat or fire not only as an agent against corruption but also in healing by removing the afflicted part (rot) layer by layer until it's gone, leaving behind healthier tissue—much like one would carefully extinguish and remove burning kind
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then completely causticize the area you have excisively removed, ensuring that all rot has been eliminated and causing none further harm or injury in your course of treatment—the ultimate act to restore health without leaving residue damage from decay (corrosion). The phrase embodies a thorough cleansing process intended not only for physical removal but also as
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Allow three days for the causticized area; pause over these treated locations until, after multiple applications of oil (which could be a healing balm), all scars and traces of decay are completely removed—this represents both physical recovery and spiritual purification from illness' effects. The period is likely to ensure that no harmful residue remains before concluding the treatment or progressing further in restorative care, adhering closely with medieval notions where time was crucial for healing. This reflects a holistic approach balancing physical intervention (caustic
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Return that heal balm applied upon it for its curing.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	If three days have passed since the meat was born and there is no spoilage, then that flesh will be good (medicine). Otherwise, continue to apply treatment where it has been ruined.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	The given medieval medical text can be translated into English as follows line by line:
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	May we use pointed cautery from the fire focused sharply for purifying discharges of yellow bile (choler).
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And you have already applied its cure with acute medicine at this division, and so take it when the patient has exacerbation.
Capitol .liii.	The provided text seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise that
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	In reference to the treatment of joints and similar parts, it appears you're discussing various aspects or methods related to medically addressing these areas in historical context
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	In addressing the ulcers and diseases of certain body parts (referring to joints in this context), which call for medical attention due to their severe cause: invasion or excessive fluid, leading these conditions downward onto the limbs; here two types of cauterization are employed—one applied directly on fire at crucial points affecting feet and another involving water used as a therapeutic agent.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	May the pointed cautery be that which emits fire like pain, resembling a burning iron according to the amount contained in the key of all parts, and is made from delicate wires.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And place the flame on top of your hand holding the cautery, and rotate it within the joint cavity until the cautery reaches the depth of the joint.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Leave it there for three days until the swelling begins to decrease.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Here comes the line to translate: Emplace therein that coarse sea salt which has been ground down and apply it over that area until that thing is removed from their reasons/causes.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Return care for the place where healing flesh is generated within until it becomes healthy again.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If it is not converted (converted into fluid), and movements are continued on the surface of the body, mostly in the limbs and feet, then with those cauteries filled with water or iron/steel balls from a lathe, place your hand over that spot; apply pressure to the small amount of remaining water therein. Wrap your hand tightly around it (apply compression), turning continuously until all is absorbed into your skin and the edge of the needle settles in the groove of the bolt already present on its own, effectively stopping further influx of fluid due to the puncture wound caused by a small amount of remaining water. Wait for about an hour (until after the malaute or effusion subsides with this minimal intervention), and then remove that pressure along with any residual blood flow resulting from it.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And if it is necessary for them inside, place their other within where they enter the body through those parts of the limb.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And apply care to those pus that the black bile of the humors is expelled from within the body, where flesh absorbs it.
Capitol .liiii.	The provided text appears to be in an archaic form of Romance languages
De cauterizacio de tremor.	From Latin, "Cauteo" means 'to burn' and is used here as a verb related to
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When trembling occurs due to the agitation of nerves or feverish conditions (or other similar reasons), it is necessary that you apply a sponge heating four times between each vertebra in the back, and also on their chest and belly areas; applying heat with these substances. Here's an unabridged translation into modern English:
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	When the shaking of him stops and hastens his recovery from the sickness that is infected,
Capitol .lv.	The provided text is actually in Latvian rather than a blend
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	When translating medical texts, especially from older languages or those with regional dialects that incorporate elements of different linguistic traditions like Latin, Italian
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When pus-filled abscesses in the foot are expelled due to severe material decay within (possibly referring to a tissue breakdown or an infectious process involving gross materials), it requires special care, which may involve:
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	Here are the translations for each line of text:
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	Mayhaps when it is necessary for this fluid (or pus) to be drained, hereby surgical incision (fleuco-tomy).
Capitol lvi.	Capitol VI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of blood flow blockage treatment through surgical incision with an ascus (a type of sharp instrument used for cutting or puncturing, similar to a scalpel).
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Troops advised to avoid drafts from the furnace which cause them distress when they are ill or need intervention of arsenic or instruments on a body part; then seemingly healthy again but difficult to restore that state.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	So when you apply vinegar to your ache, place the affected area of your abdomen on this stone used for drainage until it stops bleeding and does not come out again.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And place rest in the focus of the caulcerous wounds a few and significant ones at once, blowing upon them where there are sparks within.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	If the sanction is expelled from the orifice of the artery as you move and extract the cautery, then take another cauterized instrument immediately available in that area prepared for it; thus, do not cease to perform this operation within which the sanction has been restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	Guard yourself so that you do not burn out (damage) the nerves here present and which come from elsewhere (another part of the body), along with other ill-natures or harmful spirits.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	Even when the artery is blocked and it's not possible to restore flow in those regions, particularly if the artery is large unless one of four methods are used: or use cautery where we have blood present, or removal when there’thy no possibility for extraction; when extremities come out and they're burned away and flow restriction occurs on them, then a pincer forcefully restrains it with the hand in its cradle of padding.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	May those who administer proper restriction of the body allow for looseness and relaxation in clothes or position due to reasons of burning injuries and appearances, without causing discomfort.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	May it happen that no physician or medicine is present, then work carefully on the indicated area with whatever materials we have at hand from that vein above where our patient lies still due to a great constriction of their lower part and not over the chest; also spray as much boiling water infused with strong medicinal herbs upon this artery so it becomes swollen, causing the sick person's limb to become hardened or engorged. In such cases that require cautery or medicine intervention.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begins the second division/part (or section).
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and puncturing and blows, and of bleeding and their likenesses.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are Albucazi'se words/phrases.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	Ja have we detailed in this first chapter all the illnesses where focus and medicine are necessary, as well as the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments needed for those purposes; here I order these chapters on how to raise a limp child within their feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	When the procession goes through this place for that purpose, so as to draw out what they desire from it, when such is demanded by the water (presumably referring to fluids or humors within the body), then proceed in that manner.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	When you come into this place (the clinic/hospital), son of cow, where I teach firsthand the art of cauterization,
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	For the sake of caution which is exercised during this operation, wherein lies the patient's life that must be preserved by aspiration or incision on the abscess or outbreak site, and their appearance as well:
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	From all of these things accompanying fear and trembling in their bodies,
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And you advise you not to fall into where it is located; for a few times, you must handle men and treatments of illnesses by hand.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	From these humors gives him health and said that, he hopes for this soundness; his illness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And so that you consent to this affliction which comes from where he is (the patient), and your caution must be greater than mere covering up his condition; do not presume any cause for it without certain scientific knowledge, and by following such sound practice will surely reap praise.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And in the treatment of all your illnesses for prognosis and indication here is what helps you: assistance in acquiring fame and memory; praise and glory to whomsoever it leads.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh children, He gives you understanding and does not allow your bones to deceive or lead astray in His mind; for this is within Your own control.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And order this chapter distinctly according to the sections previously outlined in the section on caustics for head treatment within the feet, so that you may attend to what is requested of you and what you need.
Capitol primier.	First Point/Topic (Capitolo Primo)
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the care of water contained within a child'se head, which is essential for their health and wellbeing according to medieval medical beliefs. This sentence likely discusses humoral theory where imbalances in body fluids
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness requires vigilance in children, and when the newborn's head is shaved it indicates (or possibly happens to be) a sign of sickliness according to medieval medical understanding. This sentence suggests close observation for signs or symptoms indicative of disease upon infancy as per their humoral medicine perspective that physical manifestations like baldness could signal an imbalance in the body's fluids requiring intervention
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	There are some vigilances due to contamination (or possibly miasma) that is not cleansed/removed, which according to the medieval medical perspective could indicate a risk of disease transmission or in
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	You may not see this illness in children here (but possibly elsewhere), and those who come with it die; hence I have witnessed the devastating effect of death/illness among them, pointing to severe consequences for affected individuals as understood within humoral medicine theories that linked purity or contamination directly to health outcomes. This statement emphasizes mortality rates associated with certain diseases in children and may reflect a call to take seriously any signs indicating potential miasma-related sicknesses according to the medical practices of their time, where clean
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	You have seen an infant with a head washed in water (perhaps as part of their care or treatment), and the top of his/her head has been continuously bathed; moreover, there is speculation that moisture accumulated within it cannot be removed until heals form on the scalp. This observation aligns with medieval medical notions where constant cleaning was believed necessary for recovery from illness or injury (possibly linked to a belief in humoral imbalances), and here suggests an emphasis placed upon regular bathing as part of patient care, which would have been thought essential for the dissipation of moisture – often associated with 'humidity' - within wounds during healing. The meticulous attention paid to scal
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	This moisture or it is added between the navel and bone, or added to the skin over the wound, holding their hands tightly together.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When the operation in that case is moisture between bone and flesh and swelling is slight, then cut into the place where pain occurs at the base of the head as a split along the neck, and this length becomes two fingers within which the fluid runs, here lies the sprain:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if moisture increases and ulceration becomes worse, here are two cracks according to this teaching.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the moisture is inside his mouth, it means that you must open up all of its partitions and squeeze out the water when compressing that piece to where pieces are divided off - not there for your sake to absorb.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	When you cut into the spot of the head at this methodology, there are three cracks.
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And restore the intestine within its cavity, and tighten cracks on sheets and blankets: apply water over body and oil inside by noon today, secure with bandage for wounds and ointment in hands; firmly fasten the head to ensure equal distribution of fluids until the patient' extricates from excess moisture.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and windpipe of saints and mortals for this fluid expulsion from these vessels.
Capitol .ii.	In this translation task for an old medical text with influences from Latin
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	From the vessels which are grasped by their hands, they call it 'hilus.'
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When diseases or spaces arise within the hips or chest, and it is ancient practice not to intervene with medicine at this stage, then intervention of any kind takes place here at the beginning of these two vessels.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And when you intend to insert those into the patient'dict chest, and rub down that area with rough cloth for it to display their armpits, also tighten up your arm around his collarbone under the hard linen; consider where veins are located on each body part which has been previously touched by forceps (nail picks), such a procedure is only performed in strong men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	Return the lock over the arch of the foot where it meets each bone joint entering into the mouth (of the skull), and mark with a pin on any part split by gouty toothaches coming inside through these points, as directed by head physicians.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	If you wish, insert the splint into the artery and divide it at the points below.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	When the length of the incision is two inches adjusted, whenever any vein enters the sanctum and exits with a pulse frequently beating, it rises quickly through that jumping motion.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	May you not see the artery at the joint, then measure from the auricle (ear) three fingers' width and apply pressure with your hand until it enters into the mouth.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	When the bubonic plague is contracted from a sanction or leech (a method used for bloodletting in medieval medicine), only as much venom must be drawn, and no more than what appears of the vitality of the patient's vein and humors should be extracted.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Consider the soil (context of health), and if there is any cause on the bone, then divide it off to prevent apendicitis abscess from occurrthy intervention.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return strength to the child with wool and lint of cloth, and take care that the oil within be healed.
Capitol .iii.	The provided text appears as though it could be from an old medical treat
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	When extracting the arches that are within the temples, one would refer to a procedure potentially related to dental or cranial extractions due to their proximity to these sensitive areas of
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When ancient acrid exhalations or cataracts arise from agricultural moisture and affect the bones of the skull (temples), due to their humidity, these conditions remind us that we suffer in them herein; therefore, it is necessary for healers using medicinal herbs as comfort measures. Thus, when suffering from such ailments requiring extraction or cauterization of those teeth adjacent to the temples, which have been shown by ourselves:
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The operation and extraction of those humors that reside in the thighs; understand arterial visibility on the temple - it'supersedes when hidden by few hands due to movement force.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If it is hidden, then the colon of the malady'thy should be tightly clamped with any cloth; and heat or steam applied to the area until you see its eruption appear.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when you take it (the cautery), this is its form/shape.
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	Here comes the first sentence in English translation: And place your finger where it will find ease as you approach the artery; and secure shoes on his feet above that from which you remove what is therein of bone and under clothing those things by which he has them, up to a total part.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	May it be that if the artery is subtle, then wrap around it at the extremity of the body part, and insert into that portion according to the quantity by which their limbs are elongated and contracted; so there will not flow blood from all over until inserted.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	When expulsion of the sanctus humor from the urinary bladder occurs three times, then...
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the artery is large, then you should place it in two locations halfway down to the feet bones and not near the cord as this could lead to decay during healing of the flesh and cause a flow of blood (fluids). Here's what each part means:
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	Return (apply) the excess that is between two ligaments, and apply it at this time or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you wish, cauterize that which has been previously done with a pointed instrument within the mouth and keep it at the location where that particular surgery was performed.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E es milhor obra sino che il male si dia febbre o è di scalfocompleto; qua cauteri sono di quelle cause che aiutano alle umidità finite, e quindi è meglio in gioventù.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	Cover the area where old arthritis has formed in the joints with an extract that is applied gently on top, and have a cushion placed there for comfort; apply medicine according to your prescriptions so as not to harm the flesh or bones within until they heal.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	While you work elsewhere during another visit or event, then take measures to contract that fluid from the arteries, either by using a compression device (catheter) or where it enters into its fistula/port site; tighten your grip so as to restrict that flow.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If a cause of those is not before you now, then pause over the spot where his sanction has contracted, and bring on the fiery heat within it until contraction ceases, and when he strengthens again, so too should your string tighten accordingly.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	When you place a caustic outside the artery for which you have already two locations to try and test them out, holding it until they reach the bones, so that when it is between your limbs, it cannot be consolidated by anything from this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is how the pointed cautery should be used:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	E is the sharpness of the two cloaks examples.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	May it be if the patient' extricates themselves with great difficulty and resembles having two sharp screws (or pointed objects) inserted into each part of their body; do not cut down on flesh due to speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	So when in those there is any thickness, heat from the focus remains there and flesh detaches loosely.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better in its entirety and has been given a lighter touch.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	Where there is a space between two cushions wherein lies the quantity of said body' extraterritory,
Capitol quart.	Capital quarter (This line appears to be an excer
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	The treatment of sharp and acute pain in the joints caused by cold humors within the body, as per traditional medical practices described here:
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the acid is stored within those veins that are above the patient's chest and causes no discomfort in any way for medical treatment, their back may become reddened as if they were carrying ants while walking, and their hair stands on end due to moisture from tears; ancient healers use this method of operation, thereby completing that form of care.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	You command the malady to draw out the hairs on their face, and you insert them into three incisions made at the mouth according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	If the length of the fissure is two fingers: one finger away from the nose's midline in the forehead area where tears are produced, and another a little distance according to the movement of those eyes which produce tears, then this refers to three parts.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	Guard your jaw from the onset of teeth grinding that are positioned at two angles and extend your neck to continue both upper jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	If in any joint there is three times its size adjusted or expanded, then it means that an excessive amount of fluid has accumulated within the space of one articulation due to imbalance or blockage of humors. The physician would recognize this
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	If there is an applied padding or linens that are being moistened, it indicates decay has set in within the sanitary cloth where waste material accumulates and decomposes. The physician would note this as a sign of possible hygiene issues leading to further health complications for the patient.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Approach between two sharp limbs (possibly referring to fingers or other body parts), which constitutes the form of his insufficiency. Here 'inscription' likely refers to a condition noted by examining these extremities, possibly suggesting joint issues like rheumatoid arthritis where pain and inflamm
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	It is about the division of Temples (possibly referring to sacred buildings or organs) within his second joint, indicating an issue possibly related to spiritual health as understood in medieval medicine which often considered emotional and religious factors alongside
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise all along the cord that lies between two joints at which this chafing occurs upon his bone (the femur), and address it to prevent migration of such inflammation into the second joint—implying an injury or condition wherein swelling, painful synovial fluid accumulation ('inflammation') from one area spreads potentially causing complications in a nearby structure. This highlights medieval doctors' concern for not only physical but also spiritual well-being, as they saw the body and its maladies interconnected with overall health
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Remove from this padding and insert into the first joint another tool (possibly a splint or different kind of padded device), which is intended to be used cuttingly on one end while being gentle upon both ends; suggesting that they would carefully apply pressure with such an implement for treatment, mindful not to aggravate existing injuries. This demonstrates the careful and nuanced approach medieval physicians took when treating their patients' ailments by using precise instruments tailored to different parts of body affected in various
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	E pause the flesh of that gout must have its attached meat under it (the tendon), and press on his leg bone to reach the hernial opening, cutting off all veins coming down from the head hairs.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May continuous inflammation from the sinus appear of the colon, and place fluid there within the other opening between them.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	Put pressure with your hand on the amount of blood in the vein, withdrawing from where the varicose veins are swolthy tightened.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Here the patient has applied pressure in any crack of their knee joint and on those grains between skin and bone when they are wet with water or oil, and we avoid that sore becomes an ulcerous condition (apostema).
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And in the third day they apply great warmth of water or oil on your ligament and massage with borax soap and others until the diseases are healed.
Capitol .v.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide enough context for
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	From the treatment of wounds to purify humors and aids derived from cuts made by fingers,
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When the cold water catharsis comes and continues, and at times humors of the malady expand their size, then both guardianship over them is relieved, and ulcerated eyelids and navels become scaly skin; in the forehead before birth there is a sharp acute pain that extends outwardly consequently. It becomes clear to you through these accidents that materials and catharsis are not coming from their own veins of divided parts but rather due to disturbanse within them, as carried by vessels originating at those divisions.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure in these is that you command the malady to raise its own forehead, and with your finger make a crack at the spot on the forehead where it lies down (and place the incision within this fissure into the right temple; and insertion of the cut inside the bone), until the bone comes out.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Remove all phlegm or dry lungs and fill the space between their lips' mouth cracks, either in them themselves or on linen as dressing:
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Whenever there is an excess of pus above in the abdomen and chest, it prevents further suppuration (abscess formation).
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	When the fever and sweats have subsided, then cover your body where bruises begin to heal (inside you), and apply this carefully prescribed remedy that removes pus from undernethy; as if taking two parts of flour made from wheat and four parts of beeswax. Mix them together, and when applied externally or administered internally in these conditions with respect for the body's natural constitution (using things according to one’s temperament), it becomes a healing paste used on wounds associated with bruises as they begin their regeneration process inside your flesh/skin.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol VI. (The Roman numeral "VI" indicates
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	From the treatment of fluid that accumulates in the fingers/toes:
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Total cause that occurs in the fingers is one of four species; it may be mineral like iron or tin, similar to stone (iron and glass), caused by fluid as with water and vinegar/acidic liquids, or due to animal likeness—whether a creature itself.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	Therefore when blood flows out of the ear or appears similar to those causes that do not settle in the ear, and if you see it (blood flow), it may indicate some form of oil violation or imbalance of body fluids, treat accordingly for its removal, and make them cough up what has come out through stornulation.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If not extracted already, then apply gentle suction using the specified instruments for which this is the form.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If it is a fistula (foreign body), then be present; and if not, administer its removal gently but repeatedly over small doses of potent herbs or doubling the initial amount until removed.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if there is not an opening (for the needle), then make and insert a hollow arsenic or lead needle into the extremity of the joint, sealing it with wax and oiled substances to prevent any leakage except for the needle itself.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Return the intestine or hernia inside its cavity; where it was previously pushed out excessively with water that we have recently measured and taken into account.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	May it not be gout in this manner, then take hold of the leech or worm attached to their vein with pressure applied by hands as needed and pause at the extremity of its course, encasing that spot carefully taken care of.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Return that within the throat's cavity for ease of breathing and remove phlegm from the throat.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	Thus, if there are all the causes we have recounted, then you must treat that which has just come forth with caution to prevent abscess or spasm formation.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	E the manipulation of such that you sanction the opening and removal of thrombosis from the vein of Phlegon, taking hold in your palms between your own fingers and turning the auricular (earlobe) into parts above it, creating a small fissure on the surface of the earlobe where its pigmentation becomes evident.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the sentence to translate: And if that crack in figure is reached by its passage through the stone (the bone), and when the stone has been anguished properly with your appropriate instrument at this time; apply pressure there immediately, healing within it as soon as possible.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause is fat in the artery and has swolthy within it, then administer healing and removal; but if you do not obey your dietary advice, take a gentle touch as follows:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer that medicine for which he was taken in by it, and apply it where appropriate on him therewith affected (the ailment).
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	When you think that it has become moistened by the breath of fever and pause there in soft movements, avoiding putting pressure on the joints or gestures subtle enough to induce removal from here, for they have been distracted (likely referring to a state where attention is diverted due to illness).
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	May it enter the water where the malady enters through the scrotum to complete its course in this body, and fill up one's foreskin with that same water; if by any chance infected waters have entered (through sexual contact), then be ill, but otherwise take stones or pebbles according to length of intercourse inserted into your penis until it reaches the base thereof. Then insert a stone from among those previously placed in one's foreskin back up onto his erect member and jump upon that part containing said stone(s).
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So that all water inside remains within its place where it has been introduced or poured in (the implication being the body's system).
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And if water is dripping from the examination table that you hold in your hands (made of paper or cloth), place one end on the auricle and extend the other within where it can be ignited to burn off the moisture.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Here comes the first source sentence:
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	When an animal is extracted from that hole, if it's a small creature, let it push and appear as though we are dividing here; but if it'suprema force', then extract the one with utmost care using instruments like hooks and knives, placing its cause outside all other causes present in the wound.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	When the worm extracted from the artery appears during treatment and you do not comfort this fluid that we have mentioned in division and flow of distillations without providing care for it, then watch over the vein to ensure proper healing.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	So then if there is any cause of worms here present, extract that with subtle gestures or gentle movements, may it not be the case without reason; otherwise take a hollow tube drawn up and below which this will form our means.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the delicate part under the armpit according to the quantity that suffering may cause; and draw out these secretions with forceful sucking, so long as all worms are expelled from their hiding places (literally: "outside").
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If you do not obey the doctor' extramartial guidance, then you will become dull and shut in the channel of the catheter where we have placed it with wax; administer these drips which have already been strained out by ancient remedies during treatment for parasites.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is your effusion here, which you release the medicines into on this very instrument of which this is its form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	E for that one of silver or lead is struck quickly in this vessel, and placed on the underside (or undernethy).
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	So when they push in here it is necessary for them to be in the state of continence with this catheter inserted, right there at that moment if needed.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	If you wish, take the lamp and wrap it gently around their limb, place oil or some plant juice in the cavity of the chest, or any liquid from these medicines through the canula—which is in your finger—and apply this warmth below them so that when applied pressure upwards, they will expel the contents into the space of the chest where it feels suffocated by oil.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	When it is sealed into the auricle (earlobe), it has already been cut small by fire at the focus of one'thy hand.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	When you take care that what causes this which you will extract in the feather not is too much froth, for those remedies made of feathers do not endure such.
Capitol .vii.	Given that "Capitol .vii." is not an English-
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	From what I can discern, it seems like you're asking for the translation of Latin phrases related to medical practice from medieval times
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	These remnants from the child'thy womb do not penetrate into women anymore; and this residue can sometimes be felt in the pulse of the vein at the base of the hairy or fleshless leg, which is outside clothing—and occasionally it may appear even on separate body parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And when you suffer in the belly of him/her (the patient), who does not grasp holdings or containments, it is among the major difficulties for difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	In that place where you pause the artery of the malady by the navel and look at it there:
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	So if you observe an obvious swelling, take hold of that subtle part from which this form arises.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If in the limb where it is located (the affected area), one portion of it is sharp and the other not, and if the thrombus consists of two layers like lions' heads to prevent bleeding into the artery.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the swelling is due to raw flesh in the armpit or thigh area, then cut it gently and make an incision therein until all the meat has been removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	If there is blood on the skin of the earlobe (opulacio), then place it under something subtle like a gentle heat source and apply that to the surface of the wound in the area of the ear, holding your hand over this spot.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	Therefore, if there is an excess of water that the uterus deprives due to obstruction (blockage), this lack causes pressure on the womb; be mindful so as not to harm the nerves of the vulva.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	May you if there's an outflow of phlegm, immerse sponge or cloth in water and pause over the forehead; use also another remedy that restricts the flow of phlegm, which is mentioned in the text on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.: (The text following this reference likely continues from
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	From the given Latin-like sentence, it appears to be related to medical treatment or care for an eye condition involving issues with eyelids (palpebras). Here is
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	The sentence translates to English as follows: "For the care of which inconvenience occurs in the eyelids (palpebras) of any person occasionally happens due to dampness; sometimes these issues are dry." This suggests that fluctuating moisture levels may lead to discomfort or problems with the eyes, possibly a form of bleph
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	The sentence can be translated into English as: "Thus cover those which you have touched or held at once and separate the dirt from their surfaces; place your hand over these cleaned areas." This indicates that after touching something potentially dirty, one should wash it to remove any impurities (spatum) before using a cloth (propit pausa sobre les locs segi trissat), possibly referring to the act of wiping or drying with an emphasis on careful attention.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	The sentence translates into English as: "If there is pain due to the flow of blood, then you must perform gentle cautioning (cauterization) on those areas where it was applied." This suggests a medical intervention using heat or some form of cauteration in response to bleeding that causes discom
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The translation of the sentence into English would be: "For better cautioning, use insensitive instruments and servants that return when there remains any cause for wounds; once these areas are cauterized at the focus, those wounds cannot come back." Here we see advice on using certain tools (inscizios e tropas) which appear to be hard or non-sensational—likely metal implements. These instruments should have a capacity to revert when necessary if there's residual causation for injuries; they are intended specifically for cauterizing at the site of injury, where doing so would effectively "burn
Capitol .ix.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide enough context or
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	When great sadness comes upon the eyes of men,
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Movements repeated in the patient'se eyes any cause that is assembled to greatness within their fortress and hardship, resulting in such severity they call upon it.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	When there is a buildup of thick moisture in the eyes above and below,
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	So the treatment for them is that you consider, when the greatness comes from their eyes and is moist all over their body; it's phlegmatic (or watery).
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	So apply it over that joint crack for relief and lift up the portion of ease into which you escape, place above it one lifted by force entirely, another suspended partially where separated pieces have come apart.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	May it be that if you are not dressed and cannot touch your eyes between the few opened ones (eyelids), then nothing will happen for any reason.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the figure is large, then adjust it with suture, and take care that it heals properly.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	If it is little (of medicine), you will not come upon evil through that which remains in him/her today.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the greatness declines at the parts of the eye'dictum (presumably referring to swelling or puffiness around the eyes), then lift up the eyelid and suspend the greatness for an hour, another while you indicate when it begins, and complete that part; if the eyelid through indrawing is elongated, note in no particular cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Return and wash with saltwater initially; care for the place where water is held within to aid healing.
Capitol .x.	Capitol (This seems like it could be referring to "Ch
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	From beneath the eyelid." The phrase in English would translate roughly as: From underneath the eye lid, relating likely to a treatment or medication application
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath is grays which are produced in the under-eye skin, mostly affecting children and exacerbating those afflictions; they cannot withstand sunlight as these droplets tend to collect on them." This translation suggests that 'axcirnath' refers perhaps to a particular eye condition or symptom (like tear staining) often seen in pediatric patients. The term might describe discolorations under the eyelids, which worsen with sun exposure and are difficult for individuals affected by them to tolerate due to their reaction when exposed to light. However, please note that without further context or understanding of medieval medical terminology specifics used in this excerpt (since "axcirnath" is not a recognized term), this translation may require confirmation with more specialized knowledge on the subject matter at hand for full
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	Now you talk about the eyes' moisture all night long and when they sleep; over their downy brows which are already suffused with fluid—the likelihood of absorption here is in the nostrll, where if you happen to be nearby these fluids may flow into your hands." This translation appears to describe a condition related to eye moisture or tears that persist through night and during sleep. The term 'jelous' (downy brows) suggests an area around the eyes which is frequently damp with fluid, possibly indicating excessive tearing ('moisten'). There might be concern about these fluids entering into nearby areas such as nostrils when one comes close to them—implying some kind of empathic or contagion-related fears based on medieval medical belief systems. This could also hint at the practice of observing and potentially intervening in another's bodily state, with an emphasis placed upon proximity for such action ('when
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	When you cut the belly that goes into the arcuates (arteries in the abdominal wall), there are times when the processes of these vessels penetrate through cracks according to the form of a white line.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	So extract those clothes which you have wrapped around the patient'se legs, and turn them between the right and left sides where it has spread out to ensure its dispersion.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	When you ensure that it does not reach the hip joint and thighs, hold your hand there.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If not there is an arrow in the wound during healing, you may adjust it within where heals arise; and extract that which we have said to remove; lay those grains under their bellies dipped into water or wine, resting on them above until they dry out.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	So that when salt and rest are applied within the cavity of the crack, what remains from this moisture can be removed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Return that which is within so as it may heal (or) Take care of what'dicted herein for its recovery/he
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If you apply cold application in the area of inflammation (or) If applying a localized cooling treatment to where it is swollen/inflamed helps that which was previously injured recover.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi. (Please note that "Capitol
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Manieyras de tactimi del huel." appears to be a phrase possibly from medieval Latin, with elements remin
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the patient's eyes, natural hair is adjusted quickly by means of touch and soft palpation interventions inside where this may be caused due to contact with eye pressure (tactinir), leading on manifestations similar to tears overflowing excessively or eyelid irritation. Remedy in four methods:
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so when you pause the head of the malady in the thighs; take your left hand and place it over their eye socket (nostril), if converted then say "be," else insert a needle into that space where parting bone was placed, let the thread enter through this pointed end at the nostrзу location – as pills are found within nose hair - also in the furthest parts of these, pull back the sharp point towards above-the-eye area (nostril), and convert it into a line.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	Even if the figure is determined by the amount of eye opening, even then among men there are those who differ in this aspect; these individuals have inscribed within their eyelids a large quantity according to the extent which allows for the softening of the eyelid.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	When applied over the joint lines that you have marked out, and starting from the greater tear duct to the lesser one:
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	If your natural hair crack is as large as the king'sup'.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Return the stitches in the fields within three or four days, and take care of it properly.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If you wish, bind the patient' extraneous humors with wax and attach it to them—the eye must be removed if necessary before applying bandages or dressings; otherwise, suturing is better for healing these ancient methods of treatment.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	Even though there is pressure on the thighs of the patient, it's good for treatment and not out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another symptom appears in the eye area, and it is customary to raise the eyelid with three hooks that are separated and assembled according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible for them to keep their fingers open (likely referring to maintaining an incision or a wound), then use a clamp in which there'sin fil and place that into the figure bone, placing another such pin on the major lacrimal (tear duct) area, adjust these pins so they are at equal heights between their fingers, raise your hand to elevate this position as far upwards as possible, lifting also all of the coda where it rests above which we have already assembled.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	With adjustments made with wax stitches on the patient's lips and heals those that are inside being cured.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If you have an abscess or a crack in your mind or body, clean it with sulfur and let it resemble its appearance, then apply oil.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Ataxinyce are as follows in this manner:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and by your skill, you will close the eyelid and divide the figure as I have described; accordingly, make do with small cannulas or slender tubes under which their length corresponds to the length of the eyelid and its middle according to the width of the ridge.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already inserted into the limbs of several parts, there you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	When you add any amount of subtlety under what exceeds from the eye'dictor (presumably referring to tears or discharge), and compress the cannulas of some parts that are severely contracted, do so for a few days until the codename for constriction dies out and does not return even if denied; then when it is about time for you to measure, insert there.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is late, then break open the stones in their joints (likely referring to bone or cartilage), and with care ensure that whatever living thing inside them heals properly.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When secured (or stabilized), the eyelid is lifted up and the hairs do not prickle.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	This is how you make the tools for this purpose:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	e há a qualquer extensão ou latitude não mais nem um dia nem uma noite.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol XXII. (The Roman numeral "XXII" represents
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	When the hair of the nail is bitten when it hurts, let us consider its treatment upon rising at dawn in this hall (likely a reference to an institution or place where healing may take precedence). Here's my
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hair is not natural, hard and sharp with prickliness (possibly referring to ingrown nails or damaged ones), let us consider that in this place we should gently lift it up underneath, taking careful pauses at every small depression below where there may be sensitive tissue beneath. Here's how the translation might unfold:
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	When the length of these fields is as much as a person'dict hand span (where "person" could be understood in medieval times as roughly equivalent to today's
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Place another fine thread subtly under it for now, and hold the extremities of that if you wish to do so.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over it so that your work may be declared complete; for this is a subtle and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Place the needle into the prepared part of the skin and make that entry as necessary until you extract it naturally from under the hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Return the fur within them and insert that into lodgment, letting there be only two or three furs, but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	When you pull your hand inside where it was taken out because of alcohol in the eye, within the naturally occurring cavity therein:
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	May it happen that Allah wills and He does not lift the leg, so draw towards Him as you have established in this place where your foot is resting; when It lifts His lifted (leg), then enter therein.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	Here comes the text to translate:
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If there is too little hair, then adjust a long comb through the natural hairs, and lift that up to where it should be lengthened within their spaces; raise it as directed so that it becomes elongated.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii.: (The text following this reference likely continues within
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	When treating the condition that is present in the lower part of the eye, touching below the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When eyes are swelled and contracted under the eyelids when they contract in either direction (left or right), due to bad constellation of childhood or limb formation/fracture/cauterization, it is called cataracts; this happens naturally or accidentally. It occurs because of conglomeration of childhood material or fragments from the body'setup after cauterizations (or accidents), and also due to resemblance with their ill-dispositions (bad temperaments).
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the operation in him be that you cut through that solidification and separate his lips, stopping there where it'thy cloth lies between them, binding those within which are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	Not the tool you use for healing will remove causes that have spread without limitation throughout time and space until now. If, however, you manage to return such poison back into its place (i. e., reintroduce it back into where it belongs), then curing becomes possible at any moment in time.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	When used as a mollifier with hops and taken in the water where their joints are elevated or swolthy disguised by linseed oil (a mixture), dissolved at one's own pace within these waters under this vessel, it heals herein.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The treasure of your care is that you pierce through each joint without solidifying as required for the treatment plan.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation that we have described is not any correction of the humoral imbalance afterward once focus has been directed there from before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitol .xiiii. (The provided text does not contain enough context or
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	When treating blepharitis affecting the outer corner of the eye lid, it means that a medical professional is addressing an inflammation condition at this specific location on the eyelid which can cause discomfort or
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This blepharitis that affects the outer corner of the eye lid is called "blepharoconjunctivitis"; there it does not refer to a naturally occurring or otherwise unavoidable condition; rather, its origin remains unclear from this context alone as provided. It suggests an interest in understanding whether such blepharitis arises due to internal factors within the individual (perhaps genetic predisposition) or external causes that may have led up to it being present and not spont
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	May the condition be due to trauma (from an injury or foreign object), infection, surgical intervention like cuts made by a scalpel ("scissure" could refer here as "cut"), or possibly from treatments such as cauterization performed for other reasons. The
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The operative approach involves holding a needle in the flesh of your body and making an incision there; this cut allows fluid from the right tear gland to pass into the left one, thereby facilitating drainage or treatment between these areas where possible tears may occur. Here it is implied that they might be suggesting some form of surgical intervention aimed at draining excess fluids (possibly associated with blepharitis) from an eye area by creating a passageway through incisions made within the flesh and potentially allowing for fluid transfer between tear glands located on opposite sides ("right lacrimal into left lacrimal"). This description seems to be related directly or indirectly to ocular health, although it is somewhat unclear without further context. It's important when translating historical medical texts
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Return (restore) flesh back onto the parts below the belly and above it, at which point you incisely cut into the swolthy joints.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if you return the shape of the eye according to its cover (the eyelid), then take up that with your finger; otherwise, use a stick and press on the cut part, turning it into an eye, and create cracks in the skin of the eyeball immediately.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The extremities of the diseased body parts have cracks at two angles of the inscription (the area being discussed), where they become painful and form their shape when gathered together.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	This figure is Greek letters: the line (land).
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Return or fix the meat that corresponds to its quantity as determined by how much it swells up when they open their eyelids.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	If there is a split or incision due to an opening or cauterization (fissure, suture, cautery), then it must be made across the lashes of the eyelid as previously done.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Return (or bring back) them apart at the mouth's gap as we have mentioned before.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum total of the discussion on gout treatment when it is removed or discontinued in time during operation, as it has been prepared according to its form (likely referring to medication), then that preparation takes various shapes/forms.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	The artisan prepares for any possible way into which the figure can be returned to its natural shape or somewhat similar from what was required by the operation and instruments in major arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	In this translation of an old medical text with elements reminiscing Latin,
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	From the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea. (Here is a translation that maintains as much of the original meaning and context related medical terminology from Latin, Italian-like syntax
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs for men in whose eyes it is necessary that the lid be firmly attached below the sclera and movement of their natural works forbidden—so intervene to insert within its outer membrane at the corner where light enters, elevating or extending as required. (In English: When there's a need to secure an eyelid for men so that it stays in place underne0r over the white part of the eye and natural movements are restricted—take action by inserting into its outer membrane at the corner nearest where light enters, raising or extending as needed.)
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Inscribe the adherence under a thin membrane which should not be sharp to avoid bothering the eye with its blink—and remove that membrane from over the pupil, maintaining clarity of vision for your operation (This translation reflects an attempt to convey instructions on how one might perform surgical procedures without irritating or disrupting normal eyelid function while removing a potentially obstructive thin membrane covering around the eye.)
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	If your incision is meant for easing the attachment beneath, ensure that it allows return of the lid's original shape and heals completely around the entirety (Here we have a translation focusing on ensuring any surgical intervention—specifically an incisional one intended to alleviate adhesions underneath the eyelid—is designed with recovery as its priority, allowing for natural reconstitution of the lid's shape and complete healing.)
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Return your instrument in the saltwater where you wash, or draw from it steam distilled with water infused with juniper.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And separate between the eyelid and the lower part of his body that is wet with foam in an alum book, applying pressure to the swolthy area as long as causes are being resolved for healing within three days.
Capitol .xvi.	In translating this medieval medical text line by line into English while attempting to retain
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Through the unguish and superiority of flesh in the lacrimal areas.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You understand that the second type of ulcer is two kinds: one nervous and resembles a thimble undernethy thin; it dissolves when touched by hand within an hour and then detaches, not remaining in place afterward. The other non-nervous looks like white congealed moisture with its essence coming off the touch of hands almost immediately.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both spices do not enter but from the greater tear within that gradually covers the sight and prevents light and motion of breath.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	May the action in his eye be that the humors pause at his head upon waking up, and govern their fluids within him; raise your palm over your chest, and clutch the gum (or saliva) from one of two spoonsful taken twice a day to these parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Here comes the translation:
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	When you lift that leg up for it (the patient) inside of them.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And some of the fluid has been drawn out through the sole or fleshy place where they have said this is located, and it's being extracted from the spleen stone (of which this is its form):
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	Ensure you do not touch the transparent covering and that there is an opening in it so that light can enter (implying repair), and keep your eye open for observation purposes.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Return the wound on the foot with a little salt or quick-drying herb applied to it today, and take care that whatever enters into healing is allowed in; watch over such treatment as long as necessary for its recovery.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the lancet is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle or place it therein, and if this particular kind of lancing tool requires treatment with medicine, then heal as soon as possible once placed in its division (section).
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you wish to separate that part of the malady, then use the saw from a sharp lynx's bone under fine linen as follows:
am subtilitat.	am delicateness or subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	If that which is rare and confined within it moves suddenly inwardly today or tomorrow, take the cold water of your hearth this day for its bathing, and immerse the heat therein tonight so as not to expand further inside.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Return your operation repeatedly over that which is within reason until it heals.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The seminal fluid of the tear gland, if it enters through the hole and affects one body portion significantly, is suspended for a time; examine that which has entered from there, but do not further inspect to prevent the flow of humors.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Return (or apply) medicinal herbs in the teary eye cavity, and have them inside until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol .xvii.: (The translation of this line is not clear due
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Given the fragmented and somewhat archaic nature of the text you've provided, which seems to blend elements from different languages (Latin influence with what appears to be regional or dialectical Latinisms), translating accurately poses a significant challenge without further context. However, I will attempt
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	The text you've provided is complex and seems to mix archaic or dialectical language with medical terminology, possibly referring to an ancient ophthalmic procedure related to the treatment of eye conditions in historical texts on medicine. Here’s a line-by-line translation attempt:
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	May the operation in you be that your malady pauses at its jaw under the tongue; and with those hands of yours, collect all the cut flesh conveniently for it, using a forceps or chestnut—and bind the meat within so fully that everything is finished by the instruments (takes), ensuring none of this remains in your hand during the procedure.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And if it is your knowledge that they insert those or small knives into the joint of the finger which has been recommended in our study, here we go:
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore, once your understanding is complete and the entire body has been cleansed, fill or distill in it salt flakes or powder of medicinal preparations similar to mercury contained within an album whereby it'thy assuredly bound by apostemate cautery.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If there is any cause of inflammation and swelling that needs to be cauterized with fire, you fear asphyxiation from the burning; heal this edema by applying warmth until it subsides and then repeatedly treat that spot where operation has taken place within which wound dressing was applied. Here "caus" means cause or reason for inflammation/swelling (analogous to modern English terms). The practice involves using heat as a remedy, repeating the treatment on healed areas with specialized bandaging materials.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Even though you attempt to remove all care for the patient'se hernia naturally or accidentally with iron tools, do not insert your hand into any of these operations while observing that the said body part is suffering from it.
Capitol .xviii.	In this text from what appears to be an old medical treatise using archaic language
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	The phrase "Capitol .xviii." seems like a reference or citation, possibly indicating the section number in Roman
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	The phrase appears to be discussing the management of saddle anesthesia (suggestive terms for loss or numbness in areas such as buttocks and genitals) affecting a patient's back, with instructions on how not to press down upon it while performing certain actions, potentially relating to physical therapy procedures. Here is the translation line by line:
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	So it is necessary for the meal that you consider whether he in whom this sickness has been found strong and not elsewhere ill; then take that very one who is sick.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	You command the malady to cease its flow in the thigh, and place your hand over those veins as necessary according to your discretion; and if it is required that one of these beings doubled under pressure per annum or two years following this pattern.
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	So that they may cut in one place according to this manner:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Here is the translation of each line:
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	Even if you do not see the blood at the extremities of the spine; and if your work during daytime near the sunlight, be firm in your operation so that only those veins are entered.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	When you have completed it all (the procedure or treatment), then draw the decoction into a clean cup, and do so for that your bones will strengthen which has become weakened by what is drawn out from within.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	May it not be within your power to collect all of it here at this time; and if so, apply the fluid that exits as its pain does, dressing it daily until the pain subsides and is securely dressed with bandaging.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	Once more over him after his mistress has entered and healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is how they are shaped: (Here "e" refers to this contextually as a continuation of previous explanation or demonstrations
Capitol .xix.	It seems like you're referring to an item related to the United States Congress
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	This phrase, "de reduccio di azzato all'naso," appears in Italian and translates directly
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you care for inflamed joints with cautery or acute medicine following the account of its occurrence and it does not heal, then do not leave them in flesh but cut over their ulceration to remove all moisture that is within, allowing bone (osteo) discovery through drying out.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	So when you discover that bone and sometimes in decay or deterioration, it is thus the form of this very structure.
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "He is sharp-nosed, and his flesh is iron hardness, and its head returns with ease when taking out for small incisions using a chisel or fine scalpel (in this manner).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	When you place your hand over the area where the bone has been crushed and gently rotate it between the thighs (or tighten them slightly), do so gradually until you know that this crushing injury is reduced/smoothed out.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And if there are some dry days ahead, and restore the place where causes that lead to desiccation and precise lesions have occurred.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So if the place is consolidated and good flesh has grown therein for forty days without renewal or puncturing and not falling ill in it, then you know that one recovers their health.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	If not, then it is in the body and must be reduced to its shape as a nose; following this methodology: if you find two sharp tools or acute medicine at hand, take them according to this form when they are discovered.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Its metal plate is shaped like a triangle and its wood core has been worn down to the extent of being at the stomach joint with such frequency.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Even the pressure is applied to the bone, and that portion of it near the tear; extend your hand for a few inches along the hip joint, rotate your arm within these limits wherein the humidity enters into the bones, which senses pain when you exert force upon them. 
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restores the location with stoppage astringent remedies as you take them in.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	So when the flesh and place is enduringly hardened, then I apply pressure to the area where fluid has accumulated (the swelling), placing weight upon it nowhere else.
Capitol .xx.	Capital .xx.: This line is not an actual text with content
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	The reduction of the prominence (or hump) on the back: "La reductio proeminentiae umeri
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hump is part of one's entirety and does not harm or reduce itself through clothing nor diminish by doing so; then cover it with loose garments, taking care that you stop wheezing in your chest after cough suppression treatment—apply warm compresses to this area using a mixture made from acacia honey and aloe vera extracts along with senna seeds. Additionally, apply strength through massage over the hump which is protruding as if it were little puffballs; use scented ointment for covering/massaging on top of this area that comprises a blend from acacia honey and aloe vera combined with sarcocollla.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The manipulation of the pulse is that it clings to their lion robes and each one doubles over four parts; from these things they take care.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	When taking care of them according to how much they need it.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If while crossing (the joint) it is softened, then a reason for discomfort may be present.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	Return or fasten (the ligament) for today and tonight as we have discussed.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the bowel has already been reduced, then that is good; otherwise, repeat the plaster on the pillows and straitness inside where it can heal.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol .xxi.: This line does not provide enough context or text
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	The phrase "de la inscizio de la eminence de la tunica uvea" appears to be a Latin-based medical term, possibly referring to the indentation (ins
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When disruption occurs in the tunica uvea (the vasc0llic covering of a structure like the iris or ciliary body), it exposes its eminent part and proceeds outside as if with an eye-wash, which then seeks to insert itself into the space created by the removed agula from above in that area. You position one end (the primary/leading point) of this instrument according to their arrangement; place another corresponding doubled length piece attached at its back along the part belonging to the lacrimal system and have it penetrate, pushing aside with a gentle touch what was previously removed by agula—this action is executed repeatedly.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Extracts are taken from the linen soaked in wine and oil, inserted into which they pour out their blood to allow it flow again where blocked by inflammation or congestion of humors inside them (the body's cavities). Here is the translated line by line:
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Return care for the hurt with this water that comforts it within wherein lies the patient, sick creature or being.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Here is the line by line translation:
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Return strength inside where it has been healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Based on the provided text snippet that appears in various European vernacdicts
De curacio de alconati.	The translation of "Capitol .xxii." into English, assuming it pertain
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness that is called "alconati" in fact, is not the one resembling water flowing from joints; it's something else entirely—a different malady requiring care and treatment elsewhere than just at the knee appearing to 'melt away like water.'
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	May it be that through the act of making holes in the poultice and drying thereon with your hands (and another on their legs), you take hold of each part where pain is felt, gently pressing to prevent moisture from descending further into these parts—thus addressing what ails them. Furthermore, ensure that it remains sufficiently dried out so as not to become wet again; and this will stop the flow (of 'malign humor' or excess fluid), which was previously coming down with urgency like water in those affected areas of disequilibrium ("desej" implies an imbalance).
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not fall into its place (referring likely to something that should be in a certain location within the body), then you know there is water involved.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If the descent to health is not prepared with the water we have discussed, then gout will seep between your thighs and you must take a delicate sponge undernethy (the part of the body being referred here seems unclear due to language barrier) covered in that same water which prevents continuation of conjunctival inflammation within the cornea atop the head, until it is expelled.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	So when you are uncovered (emerged), then it boils in the tailwater where you have mixed honey and water, or already added fennel seeds and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Return its healing for other causes within that it has been cured from.
Capitol .xxii.	In translating this text line by line into English while attempting to maintain as much
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	From the healing of water flowing down from the elbow/wrist (presumably referring to a limb, possibly describing how some medieval medical practices
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have the spices of water in division and decide to pierce through with speech according to health (presumably referring hereinto some form of medical diagnosis or treatment based on symptoms). Here "sanetat" likely refers to a standard practice, tailored after perceived wellness states. The notion indicates an empirical approach where observations such as the properties and effects are used for healing purposes in alignment with established health norms
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	And you must carefully separate the malady between your thighs over a cloth and place it underneic leg (implying an examination or handling of what could be pus for example). Here "stringent" indicates doing so in strict order to maintain hygiene, which aligns with medieval practices focusing on cleanlinfal management. The mentioning of separating the malady signifies a diagnostic action
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Apply pressure over the left side of your eyelid if the affected part is on the right (or vice versa), applying it directly to where fluid accumulation might be indicated by eye involvement; or apply gentle firmness with your third hand, which could refer metaphorically as being more distant from immediate direct care. This line reflects a diagnostic approach that tailors physical exams based on the patient's symptoms and suggests treatment localization in alignment with medieval medical reasoning where palpation provided clues to underlying conditions.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	Apply pressure with your right hand if the affected part is on the left (or vice versa), touching directly where discomfort or pathology might be present in alignment with symptomatic observation practices of medieval medicine; an action suggesting diagnostic palpation techniques to localize issues as per patient presentation. Here, a direct correlation between physical findings and subsequent actions is indicative of the hands-on examination approach pre
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Return the limb extremity above the crown due to the heaviness of the head atop the skull' extramandible tear in its respective part by elevating and turning your hand, holding their hands.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	In accord with returning it into its cavity (the abdomen), and placing your hand over the area so that the intestine does not come out again, you have already noticed that everything has returned due to intervention.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	Where the thigh of the camisado is at the height of the bone, and this space from the pupil within to the end of darkness (the base of the skull), that is where your gaze rests on the head crown; here you see it through the clarity provided by the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return your pause entirely into the location where water is contained within it; place yourself there for a while with another person as well (and thus if the water descends at that point), suddenly, one's vision will blur over this very space. Here translated line by line in English:
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Return rest if possible; therefore, when water descends, take that other pause beforehand so that it is not wasted.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is secured and does not descend, then extract the flesh with ease, and revolve that in water, adding a small piece of clear crystal salt dissolved in water; additionally apply pressure outside where there may be an abscess or swelling using infused rosemary oil, egg white albumen, and agitate it.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May we or those of our times rest upon that which has been washed in cow' extrusion, (Here 'mays', likely an archaic form meaning 'may') people from this time period take a moment to relax on the cloth cleaned with cow dung ash.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	If you do not obey my command within the inner chamber of the womb—for it is hardened among men in general (meaning that women, generally speaking) tend to be so with child), then hold onto your spine, which belongs to the backbone from where this form originates:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	So pierce through that joint area (implying a method to alleviate pain), and do not rest your hand on the throat; instead, aim for an underground or more subtle location there below: This suggests using alternative pressure points rather than applying direct touch above where it's potentially sensitive.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then proceed to the second as previously mentioned (continuing with another action or step in treatment that has been discussed earlier). This indicates moving on from one point of intervention
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	You must give due credit to your work (acknowledging the effort or craftsmanship), whether prepared with cow's urine as a bedding material where you sleep on two at once in total darkness. Here it is implied that using such unconventional materials and practices are acknowledged, possibly for their efficacy despite skepticism from others (implying the use of folk remedies or traditional medicine).
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	Take pause in the nature of it (understanding or accepting its natural essence), and do not take your head to either third quarter nor south side; this suggests resting without disturbance, likely referring to sleep with certain postures advised for health reasons according to traditional beliefs. It advises keeping oneself oriented properly during rest as per some medical tradition possibly related to alignments or humoral theories prevalent in medieval medicine:
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	Whenever its thread follows its disposition into the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Return that which is already in there to the dark and gloomy place of night, for some reasons allow it; then bring back the ligament inside by tonight (the seventh day).
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	Whenever you make it in the hour of treatments or shortly after, then apply the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	They have eyes that drive away water by a great and powerful gaze.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If you apply a poultice and cover it with water before the evening comes today, then correct that which yields to the application of the poultice.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	When you take away the patient' extrinsic vision and place your hand over their face (oral), which controls them for a few days at least, they already exist in an obscure state of being.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	Return its position from that place gradually and discuss about its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And you know that a student is not exempt from certain duties, and if you are wise about it, then in performing the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has come to us from those among them who are skilled in art, and they say that water escapes through a hole in the area where pain occurs (likely referring to an abscess), which causes further discomfort or worsening of symptoms.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	Even so far we have not seen this water which has purified it in our land nor brought it from among the free men of ancient times; and perhaps such water is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of medicinal herbs for which it is placed upon those, whom he himself does not know.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	These are stones of earth or iron by nature, and they lie outside this delicate triangle arrangement; their sharp edges correspond to the form'setup herein explained:
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol .xxiv. (Note: The provided text does not contain
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	From meat nothing is born in the nose." (This sentence suggests that according to this perspective, no part of a meal
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose are born various kinds of worms and pills without cause that they come together to form scorpions or polyps, this illness is called 'polyp,' which bears resemblance to those pill-shaped ones represented." (Here medieval medical practitioners likely observed nasal growths reminiscent of creatures like scorpions and linked them with the condition they termed ‘polyp,’ possibly due to their appearance.)
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	From it is blackened flesh and pus-filled decay; from it meat does not have a dark brown hue." (This line describes the appearance of diseased or rotting tissue that has turned black, contrasted with healthy red meat which normally isn'thyanmedieval medical perspective. They were concerned about changes in color as indicators
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in these conditions where the meat is not fraudulent or cancerous (which were significant concerns), take out and place them under sunlight; bury your hands within it to draw moisture, and spear with tweezers into those areas." (The practitioner here advises handling diseased flesh by removing any pus-filled decay without deceit. They suggest using the warmth of direct sunlight for treatment purposes while physically engaging with the meat—using hands to extract moisture that may help in addressing the issue, and tweezers (or similar tools) are used delicately within these compromised parts.)
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Extract that from the separated parts, and insert what you have understood of those spirits under which you know all flesh is suspended; if there's any cause in them for abscission (separation or removal), then use one of the delicate instruments at your disposal to facilitate extraction.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	May you hold on to sanction or sudden decree if necessary; otherwise, for malignant abscesses, then return the detached portion and cauterize what has separated from its seat and left all cavities open.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Return his breath or fluid in his nose into his throat and mouth; that is, help him breathe by redirecting it there.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	May it be that your nose is opened and moisture proceeds into the mouth; you will know that healing has already begun.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	May it not enter further if the humidity has already penetrated, you will understand that there is no flesh left in the feet to be crushed bones from which it did not originate naturally.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore when you intrude into his side where there is any thickness or lumpiness, and press on it with your hand causing pain in the navel (belly button) or other parts of their body due to this cause, assessing how much time has passed since these symptoms began today. 
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	Put that odor into it so that may enter through the nasal canals and sit on its throat; these are those who cause others to do this action here at school, which is painful for him/her (the person experiencing gout).
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Return the two parts of the foot and place your hand over them; there are one that appears above the nose and another below it in the leg, as well as a knife on their chest holding their hands. Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Here's the translation line by line:
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	In its place in the day of cause, pause with a metal pipe inserted into the nose for several days until it heals.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	May it be that healing will come if you use this one (referring to a specific remedy or treatment).
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	This is how the tool used for bleeding is made, into which oils and medicines are extracted in honey.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And if it is necessary (it is) silver or lead that simulates the small candlelight and gentle glowing flame, then such metal will resemble flesh as though a tiny lighted lamp has been brought close by you with tendernthy care for its meat.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	If you wish, make an end closed with a cane inserted hollowly and flat on the surface; hold it at your back where these tubes are placed when draining fluids or causes of secretions that you want to remove from below.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	Here are the translations for each line of text:
Capitol .xxv.	The given text is an attempt at translating medieval medical terminology into English based
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	When translated, this phrase appears in modern language as "From the throat to beyond its limits." This suggests a description of some condition or examination
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	 The translation of this line into English would be: "The throat lingers in the outside limits for several days until its observation is under review by him." This suggests a medical context where there may have been an ongoing examination or condition concerning someone's sore throat that required monitoring over time. Here, 'he/him,' referring to possibly another healthcare provider such as a doctor, would be observing the persistent symptoms for further assessment and management of care
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	 Translated into English, this sentence reads: "For the sake that you have entered his consideration regarding the appearance of him/her," followed by an incomplete statement where 'eredices' (which means to inherit or take over) and further context would be necessary for a complete understanding. This suggests someone is being asked about their
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	The translation of this line into English reads: "And so you pause over the location or wherein there was burning, which is present in his/her place." This indicates that a person may be experiencing some form of discomfort—possibly from an inguinal
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	The English translation of this sentence would be: "If your examination is delayed until it's highlighted, then you consider whether tardy, hardened with a dark hue and little feeling—do not touch that iron which has fractured the skull; those lingering masses are directed towards whoever inspects these fragments out of great malevolence toward him/her." This medieval text describes what seems to be an observation or protocol regarding injury care, specifically related to a broken (likely cracked) skull. The context suggests concern for someone injured and possibly the consequences if not addressed appropriately by medical personnel with due urgency and sensitivity. Here 'him' refers back to another character involved in this scenario—possibly fellow healthcare workers or an individual who caused harm, depending on further interpretation of subsequent lines that are cut off from view (noted as "quar motas veguadas..."). The mentioning
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the abscess is of yellow touch and not of cold color, then when infection can enter anywhere within it, expel the purulent matter from there and incise with care for that place'dictory fears; cure what exudes outwardly and tighten up inside so that recovery may occur.
Capitol .xxvi.	The provided text is in Latin with some regional linguistic influences similar to Med
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	When the connection between nose, lips, and ears is disrupted by dirt or illusion (suggesting confusion). Translation: When the nasal septum's continuity with the mouth area and ears becomes compromised due to filth accumulation or a deceptive state of mind.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You understand that when the continuity in one of these joints (possibly referring to a fracture or dislocation) is compromised during examination, you need not attempt correction without expert intervention from trained medical professionals ("alcu" resembling "allochthonous," indicating outsiders). Translation: You realize that upon discovering the breakdown of continuity in one of
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	So that when any such cause is identified by the physician ("alcu" for an "allochthonous," or someone who comes from another place), you adjust your lips around it and properly tend to what needs healing within them, referring back at joints (possibly a metapthyical way of saying addressing injuries). Translation: Thus when the cause is determined by the doctor for whatever issue they are examining therein, one should position their own mouth in contact with that which causes it and properly tend to what requires healing inside. This response appears as an attempt at a literal translation but seems nonsensical or incorrect due to probable confusion of medical terminology
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	If the lips of continuity have already separated and any wound appears to be healing within them (likely referring metaphorically or poetically), then cover that which seems recovering therein with your mouth's flesh, suggesting a protective gesture for regeneration ("excorjes" could mean covering gently). Translation: If the lips of continuity have separated and any wound appears to be healing within them themselves (possibly referring back at joint injuries), then cover that which seems recovering therein with your own mouth'softhe flesh', indicating a self-protect
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	May the necessity of stitching be that you add the thread of continuity or needles with which we have sewn in the abdominal suture, or add the continuous thread by hand while you and I know.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol .xxvii.: (This line appears to be referencing a specific section
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	From the extraction of those causes that come into play in our oral cavity during disputes:  
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Movements often driven by the mouth' extruded hard plaques similar to butter from the orifices of their lips, and some are even smaller while others larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore when you convert the lips and fendas of any one of those hard stones throughout the body, inflate its abscess with air or water within whereby it is restrained by said stone, and apply washing above as well as treatment to that place containing pus, so long until healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii. (The reference appears to be sectional information in
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	From the adjustment of flesh within the gums:
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great pain comes upon the tightened flesh which I previously touched with my wandering tongue, so that you must suspend it momentarily or touch it gently in the mouth and on the lips whereupon its own heat will rise upwards causing illness to run downward into sanction.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Return your hand over the affected area preventing it from being touched by any powders or cathartics/cleansing agents.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	If that flesh returns, then you must inspect it immediately and cauterize it; thereafter the cautery will not return to be used again.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol .xxix. (The exact meaning of "Capitol
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Razón del diente." or "Reason for the tooth." This line suggests that what
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When the surface of the teeth and forwards part (possibly referring to anterior or front teeth) are adjusted with sharp points, lines, and some measures in yellow/white chalk within which decay enters through the gums—these too become painful sticks." This sentence appears to describe a dental procedure where certain tools made of potentially hard substances like metal (sticks), possibly used for cleaning or adjusting teeth. The use of "yellow/white chalk" might indicate markings on the teeth, and it is implied that these can contribute to decay entering through gums causing pain – a common understanding in historical approaches where anesthesia was not available, leading people often experiensed dental discomfort during treatments.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore when you make a space between your legs and pause the head at the waist, and rub with teeth that appear where those sharp edges seem like sand within which no cause of harm will penetrate due to their blackness (negation) and citrine (citrinitas), as well as any other things properly purified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	So if there is none of that in the evening meal, then you eat; otherwise, repeat the diet on those days until they are purified for when you wish to leave this state.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	You understand that teeth require different forms of movement and shapes according as you prepare for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And for that reason the razor is where the teeth are located from which part of the body another belongs to (the location and forms of these incisors must be prepared, as they will soon come):
Capitol .xxx.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any context or
D’eradicacio de dentz.	The text appears to be in Italian, with a possible blend of Latin phrasing and medieval medical terminology
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	The text translates to: "Where you cure the patient's pain from its origin in between and throughout the entire process of dent extraction; there is no reason that interrupts the care given during this period, for it contains a sublime substance within which lies exemption in the healing process.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	May cover when the thigh is dislocated to ensure that you can certify which one is the painful tooth, where pains continue in the diseased and painful tooth until it' extricated; now we have seen this through the operation of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	So that you can confirm what is the painful tooth and understand how it works so as when scraped along the circuit of the tooth with its associated movement, dissolve completely from the gums in all parts, then apply cold on those areas causing tendernthy or fine fractures for gradual consumption within where that goes.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if there is no exit-tool available, take one of those instruments immediately, and use it right away for the ease of removing that which has been cast in (perhaps referring to a lodged object or foreign body), until you reach common meeting where aid can be provided.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	May it be if the tooth is dislocated or decayed, then bind that with cloth which has touched the displacement and tighten it at the tip of a thin needle so that it does not come loose during your constriction on that limb holding it together.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	When you work exquisitely with the scalpel in all parts of the gums to guard your strength so that it does not weaken and break apart, return over the thighs due to its cunning which is greater than the first pain felt by him/her.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And wash off its cleansing is done with water or vinegar applied internally and externally.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If there is a flow of bile for some time, attend to it regularly; otherwise, sprinkle some ash and vinegar over the patient's body, and if you do not cleanse that effluvion (bile), then burn with cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and tweezers are those which make the tooth loose during extensive dental work beyond its cavity, in short movements on thin or thick material, so that they are not bent when used by them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	When they are like thick arms within that when you begin stretching them out, they shall not be doubled and go beyond their limits.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
Capitol .xxxi.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from what seems like an old
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Translation of the line about extracting teeth and bone fragments from broken jaws:
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract the decayed tooth that is causing trouble, let it rest at the edge of a table for one or two days until its cavity has been softened; and afterward apply an anodyne or bandages made from materials in which teeth are assembled (like egg shells or bee wax), using forceps as their shape.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extras outside of them are also pains stitched with a reed or leather.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If you do not obey my instructions using these forceps or tenalas (tools), then you must dig into the root and remove all flesh, inserting the tool I provide as a small lever like this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if it is a short but large part of the body that does not break down or become weakened, then there is nothing to worry about.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the razor is used for incision (foray-geta), it must be sharp; otherwise, help yourself with these instruments whose forms include at least one heavy blade shape:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second tool is that it's triangular and has a subtle end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now you will help with this tool which has two levers like this:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments that we prepared by cutting teeth, it becomes well-made at the top of this tool, and so is its form.
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the twisted or shortened part of the limb, which is not due to oneself but does not break:
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you know that these tools of teeth grinding seem similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	Mays the skilled and subtle artisan of medicine understands what means to him in terms of operation and various illnesses; these are diseases for which ancient healers did not know nor pause with their instruments due to diverse forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the jawbone or other bones in the mouth are fractured, or if they have been poked (possibly indicating a procedure like extraction), care is given over that area where it is most convenient for us to use our instruments and forceps designed for removing teeth. Here this is how we handle such cases:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And whether it is gradually or in stringing up through its mouth, so that no part of the body escapes outward and remains outside where treatment can occur; restore the place with appropriate medicine for this condition.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May it be that if there is a small fracture in the bone, take care of what belongs to that fracture and its blackness, and heal whatever should be inside so cured.
Capitol .xxxii.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	From the treatment of teeth, considerations must also extend beyond them concerning overall oral health and its impact on general well-be0fness in this translation
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent in their natural form and mainly occur in women's breasts (as they often do), it is evident that one must consider: if the tooth itself serves no purpose elsewhere, nor can its removal or ligature be performed using available tools; however, there may not necessarily need to attach this foreign object directly upon it—rather indicate and operate on these as though you are treating pork fat. This suggests employing a sharp steel from India for the procedure – perhaps an instrument shaped similarly (as would naturally occur in porcine tissue) with acute points, much like dental instruments of that era which might have been used to address such conditions effectively within their contemporary medical understanding and practices.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And if your instrument engages this particular tooth for several days as part of its treatment process—ensure that it is not associated with other teeth beyond necessity; in doing so you maintain a focus on the specific issue at hand without causing confusion or additional concerns related to multiple treatments, which aligns well within medieval medical approaches focused primarily and directly on curing rather than complicating.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the tooth is prominent in decay and requires attention – then proceed with that sharp steel from Indian ironwork fashioned into an appropriate form for this task; carefully remove what needs eliminating, taking care not to involve additional teeth beyond necessity. This instruction reflects a practical approach typical of medieval medical practices where direct intervention was often preferred over more conservative or palliative
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And whether it' extrinsic is from iron of India and Mexico or manipulated points made with limbs (which are considered as needles), such that one day, at most quickly through facilitation, so there won’t be any other dent extracted and decayed.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Return those lines there in time, and rub them with alcohol from today'suponition.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If it is from where one part has been broken and the tongue speaks (likely indicating symptoms of speaking or swallowing), then you must restrain that which was inside, ensuring its sharpness does not cause pain in the tongue nor distortion of speech.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide text for translation in its
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	From the medieval context and considering your request, it seems like you're asking for a line-bysided English interpretation of what might be related to restorative dentistry in metals (
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth are worn down before concussion and removal through percussion or extraction, and you have cured them with appropriate medicines from the study of medicine, but your treatment has not been sufficient; thus they will fall out in those made strong by gold and silver alloys. However, since these metals can be bent back into shape for a time after being worked on it here is implied that there's an attempt to restore them using bending techniques which might align with some form of ancient dental metalwork repair or restoration practice (Note: The translation attempts to capture the essence and context, but without specific historical knowledge about medieval metallurgical practices for teeth treatment, this interpretation may not precisely match contemporary understandings).
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And if it is in such subtlety and contortion according to what can enter between the teeth; then grasp the tongue and insert it twice into the healthy mouth' extramouth, growing as much as possible within the twisted parts of the jaw or where there are multiple stones (impacted wisdom teeth), until you reach the tissue in the other part.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Return and apply the poultice within that portion from which you commence, stretching your hand firmly but gently to ensure it is not swolthy with moisture.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	Where your bandage is at which you must firmly hold together the teeth of the nails that do not escape,
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	When that liquid has been taken out with Roman pressure,
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If there is a separation or hernia, hold onto that particular part firmly throughout the entire process.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is how the teeth and the straightness of healthy as well as diseased teeth are tied together sometimes:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When returning a stone or applying pressure to any part of the body during these times and it expands as we have recommended, let them swell up again.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	Only when an expert tool and wise physician intervene can it happen.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
Capitol .xxxiv.	Given that "Capitol" is not an actual text but rather seems
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	From the ligature which enters into our tongue and forbids speech, this line appears to be referencing a condition or restraint whereby an external object (possibly some form of medical device or substance) is used in such a way
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	From this ligature which enters into our tongue and quickly restricts it or naturally holds the person in silence who has already been made speechless either intentionally (voluntarily) or involuntarily, due to an accident where a creature that was previously established is still causing harm. This translation implies there might be some sort of physical restraint applied directly on the tongue by means of ligature—a device such as a splint or mouthguard—that prevents speech and could
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	In this operation with the worm inside one's belly, his head is in their throat; raise your tongue and insert that nerve ligature according to how much you want to fix or control the movement of the tongue related to swallowing functions. Here, it seems a medical treatment involving some sort of intervention for an internal condition (perhaps referring to worms affecting one’thy health) is being described. The procedure likely includes manipulating and potentially restraining part of the tongue using nerve ligatures—which could be understood as specialized tools or techniques designed specifically with precise control over specific areas, suggesting a nuanced medical practice aimed at dealing with parasites affecting swallowing ref
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any tightness or knotting present (possibly referring to physical discomfort caused by worms), and you wish for the creature's state of affairs—the parasite, in this case—to be resolved through dissolution; cut that ligature according to where it was attached so as not only to release but also resolve any knots or entanglement. This line suggests a treatment process involving cutting off an existing nerve-like structure (ligature) used for restraining the tongue, likely in response to some sort of parasitic infestation that might have led to discomfort and difficulty with swallowing—and see
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	Guard yourself so that there is not joint cracking in the skin of the flesh and split apart ascorbic acid flow from the sancus (spleen).
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And cleanse the marks of incision with warm waters or vinegar and salts, apply pressure to the tongue immediately; this is where the tongue presses on any corner during speech, ensuring it does not solidify at other times.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	May you cool the inflammation by placing it on a glass that has been washed thrice; may blood flow into this area and when doing so, use caustic substances to seal wounds in which fluid flows toward (this place).
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Return that healer for those other causes within which it is needed to be cured.
Capitol .xxxv.	The provided text is from an ancient medical manuscript with interspersed Latin phr
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	From extracting a ranula immediately after the tongue. This instruction suggests that there was a procedure involving removal of a ranula, which is
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some addictions to extract ranulas immediately after the tongue are assembled by small pieces of metal or other materials, which prevent the tongue's own movements and thereby enhance them while inside the mouth. This medieval medical text discusses a method where foreign objects (possibly made from metals) constrain natural tongue motion potentially as part of an attempt to manage conditions like ranulas—fluid-filled cystic masses undernezymedical practitioners in that era, perhaps believing they could help with such les
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	In the mouth of a patient sixty years old (or more), there is consideration for an implant, or perhaps another form of intervention within it to address this condition which requires attention due to age-related changes in bone density and gum health that might affect healing. This line suggests careful treatment planning
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If you see a black or dark hue that is hard and as if the patient does not want it (suggesting an unwanted foreign body sensation), do not touch where there are teeth—which could be interpreted here referring to dental structures potentially being avoided by the affected individual due to discomfort. This line indicates a cautious approach in dealing with patients who have visible and possibly sensitive lesions, perhaps related
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it is white and moist (possibly referring to a cyst that has burst or an abscess), then place the onion in there gently while incisionally applying silver dressing beneath; if winds enter during your operation, pause for three times before resuming work, so as not to distress further—this implies taking care of any unexpected interruptions caused by external factors like weather changes which may affect a patient's condition or the healing environment. This line shows an attentiveness to both treatment and environmental conditions that could impact surgical procedures in historical medical contexts where such concerns were recognized, even if their understanding was not as developed as modern medicine today might suggest. The mention of "onion" is likely metaphoric for a wound dressing rather than actual onions—this kind of imagery often appears throughout medieval texts to convey ideas related to cleansing and healing practices using readily available materials such as silver (silver nitrate was known for its antimicrob
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Return to your work within which you have taken care of him until he has been washed and cleaned (bathed), so that his other ailment can also be cared for while there is still water inside, taking care of it as well.
Capitol .xxxvi.	From what I can discern based on my understanding of Latin-influenced
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	When extracting corns and calluses, especially those in the groin area where there is none elsewhere on the body, here comes your sentence to translate:
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When gout attacks in the joints, those are the accumulated nodules composed of yellow bones that have not been cured since their division and do not heal with this treatment; when they are hard, dark, devoid of feeling, avoid touching them with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	If it is desired for the color and nature to be red and heavy, do not touch that with iron through the flow of blood; leave it within itself until maturation occurs, or if you drag it out yourself, then break it apart by force.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If it is of white or silver hue, subtlety arises from within the patient, then they are considered inscribed (or fixed).
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	The operation in the body is considered (by you), as a result of your own action; and when it has rested after completing self-catheterization or if there are any diminutions, then straighten the thigh down to the knee joints keeping head on shoulders with hands clasped behind. The servant takes between their fingers holding the tongue deferentially from behind towards noble instruments of which this is form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And whether it is made of silver or gold, and subtly with a cautery.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you perceive that the tongue and show it to me, hold onto their throat gently until they are calm down in peace, then pull them as far back into place as you can manage.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another fluid that you draw out from the tunics (the patient's clothing or skin), and with this same fluid, apply it to the tool which is used for its form.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and when the external parts of it are bent backward, as they will be for each other sharply, so that their bite is made from iron at the beginning. (Here refers to forceps being assembled with the handles turned outwards; this action causes a pinching effect due to sharpened edges when used together.)
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	May if this instrument is not with you, then cut that bone from which it comes on; and whether it be one piece or more than one, make sure the cutting does not occur in different parts of the body.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	Putting in the incision, according to this method of making an incision, and wet it down with water soaked up from humors.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May it happen that if there is excessive phlegm flowing within the body, boil water from hops of barley or mint and cherries as causes for restricting such fluid flow, pay attention to this which helps restore health when available.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And some measures are taken hereafter for those appendices other than these teeth above mentioned in the mouth'dictions of small gums, as they come into view according to when needed and what is said therein about them.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	E she too was a healer from apostasy who had been born in the city (the location is not specified), where her apostasy tended towards blackness, with little feeling and already had an opening made within that very same belly of hers, breathing straight through meat as if starving for food, forbidden to drink water or eat any form of sustenance by this entity she has been (possibly a demonic presence), leading her potentially closer to death should it take one day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	The aposteme was so severe that there were three measurements across where it entered through two fractures.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So I took your pulse manually and rested there with one of them, pulling out that large portion from it, taking heed to take care of the other part understood by touching upon it as well; then secured my mouth over its orifice, pressed down his tongue, ensuring both aspects remain within their respective lesions.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity; it only moves slightly within there nowadays (or lately).
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Thus it is the gout of that woman, and immediately drink water, and apply food, so that they will not cease to inject those humors causing trouble for a long time, until the injection reaches the point where knowledge enters while continuing its progression.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Thus I will engage and cauterize the gallbladthy of him, thus removing obstruction; and with my footsteps shall not be heard by God above mine own doing it thereof.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Given that "Capitol" is not part of any provided text or typical Latin
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	When delving into the depths when one becomes absorbed in study, particularly within a historical context where medical knowledge was often transmitted through such dedicated immersion
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When arthritis affects the joint of the hip (hubula), it is deep and prolonged ("es apostemada"), hence there'dictly no perpendicular line can be drawn to describe its extent accurately; if instead, in a part where bone is thickened and round-shaped ('grossa e redonda'), then the term used for this condition would likely refer metaphorically as "bubble" (which may relate historically or regionally specific terminology).
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When healed with the water that we have spoken of in division, do not interfere with your treatment, and even when you apply a cauterization needle (which is subtil), after placing it on what has been added roundly; if directed to where lengthy or long red/black blood flows outside its center point, hold onto the expectation that there will be fear over here.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	When you turn that second movement they told him about his whiteness and lengthiness, so make the malady (joint pain) open up with a tool of which process shapes its form and settles there as an ointment in the newness; then draw out that thing using one or two instruments used for inspection inside each triangle formed by moles.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	When what is not inserted there but rather that which has been adjusted to the patient'se natural condition may be put in place; if you insert it from here, speak your language then.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Return their legality (the intestine or hernia), using the water we have prepared for it in the area of two thighs; take care that which is healed within this space.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the abdomen is terrified due to its ignorance, and uses fear during cauterization, this anxiety about using a heating tool for treatment is nothing but acute water pain, and you should pause at the waist of the patient'se wherein place your hand on their tongue with that very instrument we have mentioned before, and also hold cold water from our previous discussion in the cauldron used for cauterization; comforting this living cause thereof. And cease motion neither thick nor subtle here—that is to fulfill what was said about its form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The external cavity in which medicine is applied corresponds to the hollow of a knife blade and rests on the instrument used by medicine, so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of this person does not enter into the medicinal application itself and thereby prevent any cause arising within it.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Here you are with your hand in medicine, and express it through the space of my tongue inside while I eat so that what is consumed can be blackened and numbed by the bite of medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	If you wish, prick the wound and cover it with this material over the extremity of the ray (referring to an arrow or bone injury), immerse the covering in medicine, ensuring that as much is absorbed into the cannula where the dressing adheres; thus achieving what amounts medically necessary for cauterization like wine. Once this amount has been reached and it takes about three days or four for healing to occur:
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If indigestion occurs while you are practicing medicine, repeat that treatment and apply cautery to the circuit of wine in the pot at the beginning, cleaning away any water present therein, washing it with water for cleansing, curing from within using embrocation, and insert into intestinal obstructions until healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This remedy for healing has been placed with care and used out of fear or caution.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Alcunas curaciones take place when submerged under water in this remedy: calamint, yarrow, rue, scraped Arabic, camomile, sage, and wormwood are added to these herbs; all causes or some of them are ground into a paste within the vessel. The mixture is then fully immersed in water, left for hours until sediment forms at the bottom (and possibly foam on top). A stone trap lies at the surface of this liquid bath where an instrument made from silver according to this treatment method rests; it can be either silver or a similar material used by doctors.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the limb into the mouth of the malady while the vapour presses on the soft palate causing it to become dimmed.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Here applies pressure on that dry motion within which it occurs and ensure you do not perform this treatment when the patient is undergoing an apothecary'supremacy (or current remedy), as too much adjustment would worsen the splint, but rather follow the instructions of the apothecary.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	May it not be that you do not have this instrument with you? Then take a cane and make an enclosure outside of yourself using the goat'sear (goatee), so that the mouth of the bladder is lubricated, for the smoke from the fire prohibits such. 
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capitol .xxxviii.: (Note: The original Latin or medieval medical termin
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	From the extraction of thorns and water that cling to the sole, and from other causes:
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Movements persistently cling in the groin or backbone, or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Now when you extract what appears from them upon sight above the tongue with an implement directed towards the sun, place your finger on it to declare that it is in the gout.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If you have not yet determined the causes that we have mentioned herein, then use a chisel according to this form.
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	Even if it is thick or small and within its cavity where you insert into the patient' extramenitre to ease their inflammation.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And lift the patient'setup on their shoulders and ensure that you guard the touch of your hands on their neck or backbone, so it can return to its position next to those who hold them.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	Even if the malady enters therein through his ignorance of its local cause and incites him at every opportunity to attack with whatever tool he has prepared, according as much force is required within that place where it dwells.
Capitol .xxxix.	The text provided appears to be from an early medical context where Latin or its regional
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	From the extraction of blood attached to arteries (presumably within a surgical setting). This sentence seems incomplete and may lack specific details, but here's my best interpretation for translation:
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When medicine requires the extraction of blood that has been identified in medical treatment and does not cause discomfort, consider now entering into the artery within the groin (presumably where access to an artery might be gained for such procedures), using a tongue made specially as your instrument. This translation assumes "sanqu" refers specifically to something extracted from blood ("medicine"), that there's some context of medical treatment, and possibly historical or less formal forms of surgery due to the mentioning of an artery in the groin for extraction (which aligns with medieval practices). The term “guolayro” might correspond to ‘groin,’ where certain procedures could be conducted. "Instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat" likely means 'the instrument you have
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	And if when removing the blood (sanquisuga), extract it either slightly or with delicate movements gentle in motion away from there. The translation here implies that once extracted—likely referring to procedures like lancing an abscess for drainage, commonplace at a time without modern antiseptics and precise instruments as
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to remove from there, then take a concave cannula and insert into the groin (where access was previously obtained), placing fire in its concavity; do so until enough fluid has been drawn out—ensuring that all blood extracted remains within said instrument's hollow space throughout the day. Here 'fire' likely refers to heating or sterilization of the cannula, a rudimentary form of antiseptic practice aiming at preventing infection before germ theory was understood and proper surgical tools were available as an additional source sentence for translation:
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If there is not a treatment prescribed by the physician for what we have recommended, then let us dampen the malady in either the chest or abdomen with a warmth applied through the instrument used during fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	When it occurs in this way (inquiring about a situation where something happens suddenly), then say that they fall ill quickly.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	Another operation technique in absorption of that fluid (which may be referring to the process used by doctors for some treatment), is when you take hold of an oiled layer where there are hot gases and a cover over it, within which there's a disruption; and withdraw from underground moisture. Then position their mouth at the tip of the canula (the instrument being operated on) to ensure that subterranean absorption is not directly entering while you know that the groundwater has been reached by this procedure - causing them to fall ill quickly as a result.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If not already done so, then perform the subfumigation movements repeatedly, and prevent the melancholy from drinking, eat salty and alcoholic foods, and do not drink water; as it is necessary that this regimen be followed strictly.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the tool with which one extracts pus from an abscess when seen; it resembles forceps but without any curvature herein.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	the table where this is kept, and its extremity resembles the beak of a ciconia (stork), which it wards off with lime, for as long as any cause persists, that thing shall not touch him.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol .xl. (The provided text does not contain enough
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	La frase "En le cual la summa del sermo est á aperçoito d'apostemes, anbece in seccion dosil." traduce a "Where the whole speech is put on display through signs and divided
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	La frase traducida es "Las señales están hechas con movimientos espíritus y recordan la memoria o recuerdos cada uno presente aquí." Esto indica que las gesticaciones (apostemas) son realizadas conscientemente, quizás como una forma de arte performático u expresión simbólica, llev
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	La traducción revisada sería: "Son diversificadas por movimientos y secciones, cada uno con su propio toque especial, desde los cuales extraemos el medio." Esto implica una variedad distintiva en la manera de ejecutar las gesticaciones (apostemas) como forma expresiva o artística, destacando que estas variaciones son meticulosamente elaboradas y sirven para capturar su esencia. La mención del 'extracimiento' también parece indicar un proceso relacionado
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	Traducción detallada: "La segunda maniobra se refiere al lugar donde hacemos el contacto, destacando que aquí la manera del señalamiento involuntario (apostema accidente) difiere de cuando está en cabeza; y dentro de ese mismo punto corporal sensible o carnoso, también es distinto a las señales realizadas en uniones. Cada uno se destaca como jugueteo operativo." Esta frase sugiere que hay diferentes formas del acto involuntario (apostema accidente) según el área anatómica donde ocurre—cabeza, lugar sensible y articulaciones: cada una con sus peculiaridades individuales e interpretadas como un tipo de jugueteo o
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	Even if there are some warts that have not been pierced but rather represent the advanced stage of illness in those areas, or their complements.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So other instruments that are dislocated when crossed and do not mature according to their complements, like those intended for joints, become prolonged within the body cavity where they circulate, corrupting the ligaments or nerves of that joint; if you delay this perforation inside a fully developed member (probably referring to an organ), then it will be ruptured in its non-matured state. If it is not related to digestion and concerns instead the buttock, puncture where appropriate; do so only on that which has maturely formed therein: this causes a fistula (an abnormal passageway), or becomes painful within the body without healing.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	Must you know the time of the puncture for the abscess, and then it is when it ripens.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	E understand that it matures when the pain yields and fever subsides; reduce speechlessness and heartbeat, strengthen the head of abscess, and other limbs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	Where you know that a puncture wound is present in the place where pus and drainage have appeared, following treatment of an abscess.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	Here is the translation line by line:
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in a fleshy location, then we must insert our instrument into it while confirming that digestion has reached its second complementary stage; if you pierce this area at this time, the leg of the patient and their mouth become sore due to hardness, as does the depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	May one make an incision according to the body's flesh or bone structure as necessary; it should correspond with what is required by that particular member of the body which ingests (the patient).
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	When you administer a small puncture, and for larger or wide incisions according to the variety of sizes of the apasts (instruments used for making surgical incisions), here is what should be done:
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And among those things where the cecum is pierced and inflamed when it hurts due to bread intake or other terms that cause bleeding like dropsy and swellings, at which point your hand should be placed there too, alongside what you have caused with bloodletting.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	From those who have three angles in their side section; and from them is where they are inserted like the feathers of a phoenix or the appendages of joints.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	From those joints where medication is administered in a round and moon-shaped manner, they appear to resemble them (them referring back to the body parts mentioned).
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	May those who cannot endure with their surface appendages (like nails) should not attempt to pierce that which you have already penetrated only shallowly.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	When the abscess is large and has collected pus, do not attempt to extract all of it in that hour; they take out one part from there, and place it inside another piece today, taking a larger portion each time according to gradual progression until it's fully drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Mostly if the malady is due to excessive bile or liver trouble, or in old age and weakness when animal spirits move within causing expulsion of illness, then it exits from the body where you operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Be very careful with this large incision, and place your knife there where you pierce the thorns; consider if the worm from the thorn is small or a series of flat ones—administer these as appropriate to him or her (patient); but if it's a large worm and fissures in the incision are present, cover your knife with lint at every bend where we meet.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If in the abscess there is an absence of part of the colon or if that area has been concave within its circuit, then take care to close it with fine cloth or metal wire as you do when sewing up wounds; and keep moisture on it throughout the day until tomorrow. Then process and treat what comes out during dressings for abscesses due to intimate cleanlinies inside that heals well nowadthy waters have taken effect.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If you exacerbate the flow of blood during your operation, then administer cold water and compress these areas where clothes are wrapped around it to pause that specific area's circulation of venous stasis.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If you persist in the flow of blood, then take care and use these powders that I have recommended for specific locations within this very book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is wintertime and the site of sores (ulcers/lesions) is a place where nerves are moved, then cover them with crumbs made from wine and oil, placing these above those spots.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is summer and the places are carnivorous, then when you rest on pebbles at the beginning in water and oil (and possibly wine and vinegar), do so throughout the day as we have said beforehand, and cover up any ulceration that comes out of your body while cleaning this matter within which has entered into it for healing.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xli.	Capitol .xli. (Assuming "XLI" refers to
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	When the section of hookworms enters the crotch (the groin area), it typically causes discomfort or irritation due to their presence and movement within that sensitive
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	 When hookworms enter the crotch (the groin area), they contain specialized parts or segments that hold their cuticles, which are essential for them; these components serve as limbs or means of locomotion. In this line, "petitz apostemas" refers to a small number of worm hookworms entering the skin at an entry point near the crotch (likely referring to areas where they commonly penetrate human
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	 They are moist and contain something similar in consistency to lemon juice (suggesting that the worm's segments might be coated with or secreted bodily fluids, which could have irritating properties). Here "lor son pingas
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	 They contain moisture similar to the palms of hands (implying that these could be secretions or bodily fluids produced by worm hookworms), and they are part/componentry; among them, some hard like stones ("lapideas"). This sentence details further on how certain parts might feel wet due to moisture akin to human palms when touched – possibly referring to the secretions or body fluid of these par
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	 In all hookworms and in the extraction of these there is not fear; as when extracting them does not contradict archery (possibly implying that removing worms doesn't interfere with one’s ability to perform tasks like shooting a bow). This statement provides insight into medieval beliefs about how dealing with hookworm infestations could impact daily activities such as using tools or weapons.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	Here comes the line to translate: E la operacio en seccio di quelli è che tu ti spieghi agli strumenti della forma del quale tieni per esserci attento, il quale viene richiamato dentro mentre sapevi che contiene.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If you find out about moisture (humidity), then divide that wet section into parts according to its length over the surface as follows:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	E begins in the section of .B., entering into the line of .G. Thus, when humidity is expelled, scrape off that layer containing said moisture and do not leave any cause thereof; only those tending to return will be reabsorbed after removing their causes.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	If there is an abscess of greasy nodes, then proceed as follows according to this manner:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	There is a segment that has the form of a cross, and you cut between its lips (the orifice) with this instrument from all parts taken out, withdraw your intention for it to be removed from that tunic which contains what was extracted.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If your cautery causes contradiction or harm, then you must immediately report this matter first thing in the morning.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Here comes the sentence to translate: "It seems that in healing and curing as you have said; a leg placed on an ulcerated lesion is suitable because it has little saltiness and slight moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Some things have become swolthy in these apasts which are found on the heads of such people who lack moisture; this causes it to be difficultly divided upon an aposteme at the top of a female's head and makes that same thing hard, sharp, white, and cannot be pierced—if one were present therein with probing, they would cause pain.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	May also occur in other openings here and now as the nails of children come out along with their fingernail ridge, even though this entire section is only the surface layer (superficial membrane).
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And close those that were put below them, to prevent the disease from spreading downwards into the lower parts of their bodies.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	When caring for those who are in need of water that they require for healing purposes, here it is provided (or directed) towards their place of recovery.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol .xliii. (Please note that "Capitol" may
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	The translated sentence appears to be in a medieval medical context, likely from Latin given the language and terms used ("scrofulos," which refers to individuals suffering from what was historically called
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	The translated text describes conditions where stones, or "apostems," are often found in the colon and intestines ("le colh" for 'colon,' which appears to be a misspelling of Latin), abdomen ('aysselhas' likely intended as ‘abdominal cavity’ but not standard medical terminology; possibly an error translating from another language into medieval Spanish or Italian rather than classical Latin, given the context and word usage). It also mentions that these stones can
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	This translated text discusses stones (presumably referring to gallstones or kidney stones affecting the colon) and their associated symptoms in a medieval medical context: those that are present within the colon may cause additional issues among themselves ("motas que so engendradas entre lor"), leading directly back into one's own body, similar to what is referred as "scrofula" (possibly referring historically linked scrotal inflammation or another localized infection). Moreover, the stones are associated with nodules and possibly urinary tract issues ("ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap," potentially alluding to nodes around the kidnethy head region), which may require treatment similar to
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The translated text delves into the nature of these stones ("scrophulas") within medieval medical understanding: some are hard like stone (likely referring to kidney or gallstones), others contain moisture, and there are those which were not addressed by previous treatment efforts—suggesting they might be more problematic due to their resistance to healing. The use of the term "species" here likely refers broadly to types or kinds within this medical context — a reflection on how medieval practitioners classified these conditions according to observed characteristics and behaviors during illness, even though modern medicine
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Thus in the position where you place it for treatment (the cupping), the color of the fluid that appears is similar to the color of the navel and spread throughout the entire body without being connected to nerves, veins, or arteries; not prone as if inserted into those areas. Here you insert a surface vessel from above the line of .G., up to the line of .B., observe that one in its entirety, and extract it little by little with two lids (or mouthpieces) applied on either side of the navel area when necessary, as we have described in our articles.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	Es possible that a vein or nerve has not been pierced.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the sanction has detached itself.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation within which you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And if inquiry into its bladder is necessary to identify any other small skins diseases, then investigate that area and cleanse it thereafter.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	If it is in the depth of a severe scrofulosis (tuberculosis), then do not insert that scrofulosis into its place within you.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Based on the linguistic similarities and medical terminology usage, here's a possible translation of each line:
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	When you complete wrapping the patient' extrication bandage that you have already immersed in Egyptian oil and care for it thereafter:
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	If you insert that swelling entirely, then adjust the lips and joints of the patient as much as necessary so that not even a single excess is left out.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	May it be that you have observed an excessive swelling due to the greatness of the scrofulus (a form of tuberculosis or a chronic abscess), and understand its cause, as well as applying the appropriate suture and treatment according to what is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And administer injections of wine and ointments to them for that which may break through the crusting material.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	When you turn the patient's body now and then, at that time take care of that flesh generated within which is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol .xliii. (Assuming "Capitol" refers to
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	The given text appears to be a blend of non-standard language elements, which makes it difficult to translate directly into English without additional context or understanding the specific dialects and terms used here (which
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	It seems that this text is attempting to describe an action related to the "pillow" (possibly in reference to bedding or sleep) and its use within certain cultural practices, possibly involving some form of medicinal treatment such as applying pressure with one'thy hand ('dyssero'). The phrase suggests a historical context ("in our times") where it is noted
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This line appears to indicate that the preceding description or discussion (possibly of cultural health practices involving pillows) belongs to an earlier discourse, speech, tradition
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	This statement posits that within households there might be neglect or ignorance regarding the proper care of pillows ('esquinencia'), which prevents many from benefiting fully for their heart and major blood vessels since they don't take this aspect into consideration when it comes to health in general. The text seems to suggest a link between personal hygiene, especially as related to bedding maintenance, and overall cardiovascular well-bedicting that these cultural insights or practices are deeply rooted within the community of which they originate; an insight into traditional beliefs about cleanliness and health.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	This passage indicates that in some cases where apitherapy—using bee products like honey or royal jelly for treatment—is applied directly into the mouth (or potentially to another part of the body, as indicated by 'cuando la malautia no es en la cana,' meaning when it's not affecting a specific area such as cancer) and there may also be instances where claws are used ('o dos aurelhas'), these methods might serve dual purposes. One purpose being to avoid falling ill, implying prevention through the use of apitherapy products which could potentially have health benefits due to their purported 'purging' qualities that
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	So when you wish to draw out the fluid (ascites), that is contained within the circles of those circles in the space between two circles according to quantity—that portion should be covered with thin pieces, and not cartilage; herein lies where it's appropriate for a thinner piece. This area lacks flesh and sinews are held by you (the person performing the procedure).
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	If the doctor fears excess blood in the joint (gout), then extend one end of the catheter for only an instant and open it within that space until reaching the channel, perhaps preventing sepsis if there is any cause from those humors.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Lay out the patient for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	So when the hour is full in which you pierce the throat (presumably for medical treatment or surgery), add some of your own lips from between the teeth to that place alone and it will touch the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	When medicine is given that causes meat within it to be dissipated (presumably referring to pills or remedies taken internally), then the patient' extrémities should return to health, wherein their body will he
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	Here is the translation of Al-Zahrawi's text line by line:
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	For the water leader to command that which has been expelled within be consumed again; and it is for three days, so we must direct this thing accordingly, and take care of what will heal inside while still being outside.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And when you have seen through my eyes (the physician), a servant holds the chair and mattress in their patient's bed, and they place one part of lung tissue there as treatment for them, calling it healing care; taking away moisture from the lungs because they are wheezing due to dampness, discovering pus within that small portion which was infected by said pus.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	So it has been confessed that she had not inserted a vein or sinew, and the breath of the crowd disturbed her, and healed her within where the focus was applied.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And if it does not happen on the bed of restoration, return to attend their dispositions for health each day.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Now it is said that there should be no fear in the section of epididymitis.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol .xliv. (The text appears incomplete as there is no
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	In the section discussing jaundice where pain occurs in the abdomen (belly), and it is referred to as a gallbladder fistula or biliary leakage. Here they are addressing conditions related to the liver, bile ducts, or gallbladder that
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This common yellow jaundice (gallbladder discoloration) is a type of abscess or biliary leakage and it occurs mainly in women. Here they are specifying that the typical appearance associated with this condition includes yellowing, which can be indicative of issues such as gallstones leading to blockages causing pain
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	It is said in two ways: either it occurs spontaneously or through external means (trauma). Here they differentiate between the types of gallbladder conditions that could lead
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And if it's a result from nature, there is not an engineered method for cure within this context (traditional
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And if it's accidental, they are like thorn wounds (implying a sharp pain caused by trauma), and the other way is similar to an abscess wherein pus accumulates due to infection through arterial nodes; thereby raising concern or urgency for treatment. Here they differentiate between injuries that occur as accidents, which might involve external wounds with embedded foreign objects like thorns (possibly indicating a deeper injury), and abscesses possibly related to an infectious process involving the circulatory system - both conditions necessitating immediate medical attention.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And only when it is supposed with iron as used by him who is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol .xlv. (The original text does not provide enough context
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	De seccio de les especials d'arbres." or "From the collection of tree sp
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	From those who moved to possess all their specialties, they have divided them in this section." (Note: This translation attempts to interpret the medieval Latin phrase within a culinary context of spices and nodes/seeds as mentioned by "nodes," which could be seeds or specific
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	Here where you recommend how to distinguish between the seed (node) and excretion/output." The phrase suggests a discussion in medieval texts that may differentiate natural botanical components, like seeds or nodes used for spices from bodily outputs,
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	So you say that excretion/output is heat and fever with violent pains inside where the boiling overflow ceases—and it completes when the fever subsides along with pain and heat." This medieval medical explanation appears to describe a therape0utic process or remedy's effects on symptoms related to inflammation, possibly drawing an analogy between excess bodily fluids (superfluitat) leading to febrile states characterized by fever, pains, and warmth. The reference suggests that the resolution of these conditions is signaled when such signs abate as if a bo
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	The seed (node) itself contains neither heat nor fever nor pain; and recount that golden lion whose tail is at its own back." Here the text likely refers to a specific spice or ingredient represented by this 'golden lion,' which metapthyically has qualities of nobility
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	Second in the color of its body and belonging to it as a wick or thread; they are second spices/herbs (and possibly fats), which contain moisture within them—accordingly, their colors correspond with that wetness." This medieval Latin text describes elements – likely culinary herbs described metaphorically here. The 'thread' analogy suggests these items have a slender or delicate nature and are second in importance to something else (possibly primary spices). It hints at the presence of moisture ('humiditat') that influences their color, reinforcing the idea they share characteristics with water-based elements – this could be interpreted as how these herbs may appear lighter or more delicate and possibly fresher when compared to drier components. The translator is
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	So then, when you reach the stage of curing this node which pushes out and is sought after for its strength that you will introduce it into the core to where it naturally comes forth (as pertains).
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Here comes the last part of your hand according to the measure of the size of the ulceration and push out/extrude the thorns, considering what has been observed in its traces.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If there is an outflow of moisture, regardless of its color, then you should make incisions just above the surface as mentioned in the other methods.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If from the traces of intermingling moisture you do not remove it, then understand that he is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	If it has a shape like a sickle according to this form...
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	When you have learned it as I teach, and lift that one out with care for the whole of its course (the appendix), if possible keep your palate or mouth over that area to remove the offending part (appendix).
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If during the operation it is broken or cannot be extracted, and movements are repeatedly made causing pain in that place from where nothing can emerge anymore; then extract it while it remains inside so as not to cause any further damage.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If any cause arises from within or above (the patient), whether little or much, then return according to measure/time.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you find a small part of the patient'dictorily covered by corrosive and acute dust particles, complete it with some powdered substances harmful to life and press over that which shows signs of cauterization; treat such affected areas until they are healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If it is great, then clean your lips with water and heal that body fluid which contains it.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	May blood flow be towards it, or not, then stretch out the place of bleeding with wax and let that drizzle for two days to three within which time maggots will consume it and cease its boiling bubbling in the seething (fluid), afterward return to separate what has been broken from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol .xlvi. (Note: This line appears to be referencing
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	From the necessary supports and drilling actions.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	From these forms of insertion, and from them three kinds are great (signifying the significant role they play), whereby many go to join with one another, others remain within themselves as their size diminishes.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of introduction is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of entering is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of insertion is thus:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	These are made of iron, from below (possibly referring to tools or instruments), properly descending the limbs, allowing nourishment into the marrow in the bones.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are forms of experience and they bear names; one among them is called Berith.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	So with three spices, from them is great mercy for suffering (merely) and restoration of health.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	La experienced form or shape of it all here refers to a certain condition' extrinsically described in this medical text from medieval times
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The formed manner by which experience travels, the shaped way as per these descriptions. This likely describes how symptoms or effects of
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	 The limited form in its aspect here indicates a certain restraint or confinement regarding this condition's manifestation according to the medieval text
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	 With regard to those apoplectic and exits, as well as ulcers and abscesses which occur between these bodies (possibly referring internally or externally), this phrase seems to be describing conditions where such symptoms arise due to blockages or issues within the bones themselves and other causes. The text likely discusses how various ailments are connected by their impact on bodily formations, with special attention given to those that
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	They are crafted of leather and large needles woven with thread made from iron or steel (and possibly gold), as well as surgical instruments when fashioned from such materials; these items, along with the forceps used for handling them, all require hardness in their construction. The medieval medical treatise is detailing here that certain tools necessary to address internal ailments and issues—possibly related to surgeries or other invasive procedures aimed at rectifying bone problems as described earlier—must be made from robust materials capable of withstanding the rigors associated with such tasks, especially if those instruments are also used frequently (as indicated by "les milhors"). The language reflects a time when medical practice was intimately connected to craftsmans
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	They are the experiences of black tools (perhaps referring to certain types or indications for their use), which are chosen when bone fistulas reside in cavities where they become visible, mirroring them upwards towards those cavities from above. Here again we see an emphasis on materials and methods—black instruments possibly used diagnostically within the body itself (as suggested by "reflectidos am la sua levitat") to identify issues like fistulas or other openings in bone structures that are present beneath a certain surface level ("reflexios" could relate to reflections of light, indicative here as an internal visualization technique). The text
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	Here comes the source sentence to translate: "And from these three species—their veins and arteries, as well as their bones—depends on how much of the widening (fistula) or narrowing (stricture) is present.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of grand experience bone:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of experiencing metal excretion from body:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of small lead experience object:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the bones are from movements divine forces or simple elements; these include only a curve and consist of three species: large, small, and black pepper (or grains).
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	From those of itching reliefs they provide for her, three kinds are offered herein (This line implies that from these remedies/treatments there is some
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	From those of itching reliefs they have curved shapes; herein are three kinds offered (This line suggests that among the remedies for an itchy condition there exist various items with a specific shape or form—possibly
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	From those of them have three curves; herein are three kinds (This translation clarifies that the remedies for itching relief come in a form with three distinctive curved shapes and there are
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	All these things together hold their place within them (Here, this line indicates an understanding of traditional medical practices where the physical arrangement or positioning
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a small tool for scratching relief; form like that mentioned before. Here it refers to remedies possibly shaped
Forma de unci simple migier:	Simple shape-like device for relieving itchiness; previously discussed form (In this translation, the focus
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small relief tool with few curves and similar to that mentioned earlier. Herein is described another type of remedy resembling something we
Forma de unci orp gran:	Large shape-like device for scratching relieve; previously discussed form (This translation suggests a larger relief
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of large itchiness alleviating tool with few curves and similar to that mentioned earlier. Herein is described yet another type remedy resembling
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Large shape-like device for scratching relieve; previously discussed form (This translation suggests a large relief tool used in the past to alleviate it
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of big relief tools with two curves, as mentioned. Herein is described this specific type remedy for scratching relieve (This line indicates
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of an arrow has two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of one finger has two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The form of an egg has three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of an arrow has three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of an egg has three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the forms of the surgical instruments used for cutting and removing lumps and implants, made of three kinds: one from iron (steel), another from bone (migrerte), and a third kind which I shall not specify here.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Shape of the scalpel for use:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of scalpel few:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	Las extrémidades of these ones are the sharp pains that aren'thy not stopped in such treatment, but rather for fear of insensation from vein or nerve issues; and thus they heal thyself a little through discomfort due to abscess rupture.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are forms of cautery, and they come in three kinds: large (gran), small (migier) and thin (pauc), just as you carry them with yourself.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of great medicine:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of gait in maidens:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of Magdalene is scarce:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	These are humors of bile and likeness to rain on which it is applied, whereby pain occurs.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	In the extravaginal space there is an inserted sponge hidden and in that cavity at the divisions of parts distant from it when you move about to go with your hands inside or outside as needed.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are the forms of those things.
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of wind are those by which the flow of blood is separated into three species; large, migrating and small. The forms of fever (or disease):
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	Sourced as leeches from earth, round in some length and subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use those for scraping in the entire body; only use them on meat-like areas such as the flesh of the cambiums and coyces, thighs, breasts, belly, and navels—these resemble their respective flesh.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some remedies are made from other small instruments shaped like fingers according to this form; by which reason they cease when applied through cauterization or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Some pains are round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol .xlvii. (The given text does not contain enough context or
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	From the care of men's breasts assembled from women, we can infer that this line may be discussing some form of medical treatment specific to male individuals with breast tissue—a condition known medically as
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some bedwetting occurs in the men of our community when they sleep and eat their fill, causing their breasts to swell; these are assembled from women' extraneous body parts with seams close together. Here is a possible translation:
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	To the one who takes it in and inserts those pieces into the moon'dict line according to this form, from point B down to point G, thoroughly wash away the growth entirely, apply dressed medicinal flesh externally, adjust the lips of the dress on their body garment, and heal that which is within.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	May if the nipple descends to the divisions below and is softened by its own heat as it relates to women, then are cut into two loops beneath these pus masses, akin in shape to crescent moons; within each loop contains one part of that which should be given (likely referring to treatment or remedy), entering through where the larger line encomp0sides the smaller. Also cleanse the penis between two labia of animals and remove discharge, administering what has been mentioned for sutures and powders as necessary in healing within that which is already cured.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not complete the inspection of the water that seeks to enter due to malaute'dict and flux of bile, then cover it with corrosive oil and place what has been dissolved underneath where the water is destroying (the gallbladder), taking care that whatever needs healing remains inside.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol .xlviii. (This appears to be a reference or citation
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	The sentence in English would translate roughly as: "When the bristles of ticks come crawling." This line suggests that at some point, likely when conditions are suitable for feeding
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	The translated sentence in English would be: "When ticks come crawling with spices from the diseases of rheumatism and hard stones containing a pearl." This line appears to describe an observation or belief about how certain parasites, potentially mites referred to as 'ticks' here (though they are not actually true tick species), might be
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	The translated English text is as follows: "And from those that contain moisture; and those with sealed cavities situated according to the lunar line between .G. and .B.: when you totally expel what's in sickness within a mite, then fill it again tomorrow." This medieval medical treatise passage discusses methods for treating mites that are associated with diseases (presumably rheumatism) using moisture-containing ones or those enclosed like pearls according to the lunar cycle. It suggests a treatment protocol whereby any mite removed due to illness should be cleaned out and replaced within 24 hours, possibly reflecting humoral theories of medicine prevalent at that time which connected bodily health with balanced body fluids (humors).
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	Return the dressing or treatment with appropriate oil at hand so that it is healed within time.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	If the inflammation of the glands and swellings is present, then divide it on that part where we have mentioned in the section about the swellings simultaneously with hands.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	When playthings are expanded so much that they burn upon touching them, then apply the hot caustic accordingly as we have mentioned here.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol .xlix." is not an English text but seems like a
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	The provided line appears to be in what might resemble medieval Latin, with possible influences from Italian and Spanish due to the historical context where these languages coexisted or influenced each other (e.g.,
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When varicose veins are ruptured and the hernia is reinforced over that area: when an abscess associated with a thrombosis or phlebitis occurs in these areas (the legs), you will feel discomfort, which can also manifest as stridor. Herein lies how to identify arterial versus venous inflammation and abscesses within the body based on where they cause pain: if an abscess is due to varicose veins it becomes lodged in the calf; when pressed upon its lumps, one feels discomfort there.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	When that individual is brought forth from a vein, it shows itself in the body part.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	A section of the ulcer is wrongly treated, mostly in those where it's between the thighs and angles, waist, and joint areas; therefore its healing must be avoided, especially if it’s outside or at the head, which should also be prevented.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Mightily upon those who are of their age for inflammation of the womb's organs (possibly referring to menstrual cramps or uterine issues), divide them into sections along the spine; and bind it with cut sutures, as well as binding the womb itself so that what lies within can be revealed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Return and tighten the location where between two ligaments there is a tendon within which it has ignited completely in him/her, then release the adhesion (apostema).
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And apply the healing care within which pus is generated, and provide that same treatment for what goes inside where it becomes cured.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If it is an abscess of a veinous section, then you take what liquid your hand has already taken for the possibility of this abcess at the navel, and insert the needle there where your hand touched previously; in that place enter double to extract it out from one other end extracted by another person's hand. Then bind together with ivy thread as was stated earlier about binding joint parts using grapes (likely a type of plant or material).
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	May you fear that we will pull out the thread, and when this happens immediately secure it to one end of the initial needle'nelly used in stitching, tightening the threads into four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Return salt in its place within you while it is inside of you; at that time, inspect and remove any excess from the navel'dictions herein, as what has left (comes out).
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return the pillow under you where you have immersed in wine and oil, and apply the treatment that causes healing to be felt deep within your body.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capital of inflammation where nerves are twisted together.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	When there is an ulcer in the artery and vein, and it seems like a nerve injury when pressed or caused by excessive straining, and seemingly so:
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	It is pain in their feet or on the soles of their shoes, or wherever there are inflamed joints that they suffer from among the helpers' locations or at the ankle.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E es apostema greu," which means "When there is a severe swelling," and it continues with "...and it'dicts itself into the color of another limb, in their major dispositions they are placed by themselves when struck violently." The translation would be line by line as follows:
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	Not an abscess is formed in the forepart of the body, and thus it does not spread towards either forward or backward direction.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	So that which is encapsulated in them at joints will be released with force when they approach it; indeed, a powerful drawback occurs then.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	May that person who is in the head or forehead due to a slipped disc be supported by a pillow for comfort and relief.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it is an apoplectic condition (meaning sudden paralysis or seizure), then attend to these limbs and separate them from each other; this refers to the act of carefully untying a patient who has experienced such symptoms, likely referring to manual therapy techniques used in medieval times.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is severe (indicating the seriousness of an apoplectic attack), then apply suspensions to one uncleft and scrap that part away; secure these with thread for sutureting, while taking care until healing occurs inside therein where treatment should be focused. This translates into a medieval approach likely involving some form of bandaging or dressing the affected area tightly enough to immobilize it, possibly followed by surgical intervention (suturing), and attentive aftercare for recovery within
Capitol .li.	It appears that there might be a confusion in your request as "Cap
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	If it concerns apoplectic conditions, where the lips are hurt and aching within the stomach (believed to be referring metaphorically or conceptually rather than physically as 'lips in the bel
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Evening approaches and homes come with their troubles following them into the stomachs of those people (and potentially others), similar to fungal bodies under which they live; even though it is subtle at its roots, large in size like these dwellers' mouths—where conversation takes place between lips that are small or conversing and where murmurs arise from both magnificent ones.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And their lips were turned outwards and they parted, with moisture running throughout that time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	So I have incised these and inserted them into one inch (18-6 units) deep, and the other is six inches (6 units).
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: In performing this operation in their abdomen, consider that if it is humid malaute and its essence white thinly subtlety, then you will incise with a lancet into the belly of them, where cauterization tools are present at your disposal; as long motions push forth this substance slowly over time - when venting occurs from it, perform caustic there.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	If you see the patient fearful and anxious (and perhaps also pain), keep your mind calm as iron does not break easily; may another recently forged nail be used, which is what we have mentioned here; leave it there for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Here comes another sentence to translate: Adjust within the tightness of the iron pipe so that it does not cease its own movement until separated (i.dict).
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If his thigh is of great size, there may be some cause for fear and sorrow within him, mostly in that which resides in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	Mayhaps it is possible that you separate the mass of them, and apply caustic therein so as not to return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Return that which is inside so it may heal (the patient), take care of it with proper attention and caution; ensure its position within such a way as not
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	Watch that you do not assume a portion which is dark in hue, with little feeling or emotion; this one has already become cancerous (or malignant).
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	When recalling at that time (or remembering an event from earlier), thus it came about...
Capitol .lii.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from or related to medieval medical
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	It seems that you've given a Latin phrase which roughly translates to "Regarding the care of the navel." In
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The provided text is indeed a Latin passage that discusses various reasons for navel care in medieval medicine:
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If there is a crack in the cistern and through the skin' extruded pus appears red like body parts; it looks like a lion’s pain, appearing from various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is due to the escape of the intestine, then once you have established what we've discussed today about that which has come out (the escaped intestine), taking into account its powerful differences, and with this in mind, return; thus your patient will be back here again. And as they are brought back by bathing and vigorous exercise:
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is due to moisture, then the dragon does not hide when you press with your hand, nor does it contract or become rigid.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is sickness (likely referring to fever), then as soon as these signs appear on their bones, show the symptom of black decay descending.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is through flesh nothingness, then a severe and hard swelling occurs, which remains according to its quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	May it be because of wind movement, then this touch is like a lion.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And for this operation in him (the patient), consider whether his umbilicus protrudes due to a stone, vein, or swelling; if so, refrain from treatment here because there is fear and concern as taught in the section of our text where we discussed treatments with arsenic and venesection.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If the prominency of the navel is due to either the intestine or the sling, then command that which holds it within its place and extend; and secure your seal throughout the entire circumference of the navel, where you have previously placed a cushion on top. Place yourself between their thighs over them while holding their hands, and order as follows:
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Apply heat to the affected joint and insert your tool into that area as indicated here and there, if you have tricked or removed it with the ligament; then extract and push the intestine towards the parts of the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	If you have torn the fabric (likely referring metaphorically to a body part or structure), then take that one as soon as possible; and cut off all excess of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is contrary to your artery or vein, surround that area, and return to your work at hand; take two needles and insert them into those fields strong enough so as not to break through the syphilitic lesions you have opened in the groin region, where they penetrate with pins. Then tighten the syphilis abscess over four parts using these inserted needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If you wish to do so, place the needles and insert them into where flesh is stretched out and protrudes; when they are subtly inserted and become embedded within it, take care of that which comes from the liniments used inside for healing purposes.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the navel's prominence is of fleshless or due to moisture in him/her, then cover that hernia you have found with cloth and drain out any fluids contained within it, which constitutes its essence inside them, and take care of this fluid by removing what covers (the swelling) and draining the humidity.
Capitol .liii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any contextual text or
De curacio de cranc.	The phrase provided, "Curacio de cranc," appears to be in Italian
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	When divided into specialties and in what manner they are to be treated with medicine, such that the treatment does not result in an ulceration of their body; for these bones have been created within the womb (or uterus), where care must also be taken when administer0ring medicines.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And those ancient remedies that can be attempted in this place are useful for women'dict or men whose parts have been separated and their likeness has been assigned herein; these mainly come into effect when they begin to eat little.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	May it not be ancient and severe that you cannot take care of this patient here, for they have never been cured by anyone else nor has any come to help them yet.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	When the operation is when you allocate rest as we have discussed, it means that before treating or cleansing any signs of black fever (a historical term possibly referring to cough with blood), if there's an observable swelling and inflammation present, take action accordingly. Here is a line-by-line translation:
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Here begins the preparation of the abdomen for where it has been positioned in which operation, and with a hook that is brought close to this area so as not to cause any harm or trigger those causes within them; also make convex throughout all parts around the good spinal column until no external factor can damage.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	May you find yourself in opposition to the thickened vein or artery within, then do so that surgery can be performed on it until its flow ceases, and take care of this treatment such that healing is also promoted from thereafter.
Capitol .liv.	Capital (possibly referring to "capitol," which in
De curacio de ydropici.	The phrase you've provided, "Curacio de ydropici," appears n
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have recommendations for the seasoning of water and herbs in this division (possibly a section or course), as well as how each spice should be used during their preparation for medicine.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	Here comes the sentence to translate: And it is not merely iron alone that cures her; nor does it approach to the spirits of timpani or phlebotomy, for which reason she dies.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	When you have already treated this herbal tympanic mixture for medicinal purposes and do not want to discomfort yourself with the medicine, consider that if relief has been achieved in the hump or abdomen as well, it may be another ailment of similar nature affecting other parts like your entire body or belly region. Be cautious so you don't treat what is already addressed by this remedy; fear for what remains unknown to us.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	May you find the patient's thigh overly full of vitality (exuberant viti), and not another illness but simply damp cold excessively soaked in bodily fluids; it does not affect children or old people. The nature of his operation is that when he raises the thigh between your legs, you express the abdomen with your hand on top (placing a cushion under their limbs), and another servant assists along their leg/s, controlling water flow at the start-point immediately after penetration. Apply pressure using pointed sponge sticks as per this procedure:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It is when two sharp parts are present with a splint (splinter), although they may be small in size at first and not enter the cavity during operation, so that it does not protrude into it, and you hold them firmly.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E aprop considera si la generacio diydorice è delle parti dei budelli, quà là ora covì che tu allo seccio te allunghi dal ombelich per la quantità di tre dizze alle parti giùsere sotto il pentènilh.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	May it be that if the generation of watery humors is due to illness from walking (gout), then your hand should occupy the left side of the navel for three days.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	If it is from gall (bile), then your section should be in line with him/her.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And when your limb is on top of the chest where you wish for the humors to flow, so that they do not run upwards freely there.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Here the instrument is fully inserted through the neck (entirely), and it's positioned in that section, with your hand at the sternum between the neck and the shoulder blade—and if there'dict any amount of blood or fluids coming out, clean it up now.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And through this hole I will penetrate until the stone reaches its destination in the place of water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Return that part outwardly (or take it outside) and insert an implement of which this is its form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It appears similar to a blend of Latin and other Romance languages like Italian or Spanish. Here's an attempt at translating the source sentence into English while maintaining as much fidelity to the original syntax where possible (bear in extrinsic differences between these ancient linguistic structures):
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And when the bucket is placed outside of it (presumably an instrument or container), as soon as that object enters the water, immediately take it out over the instrument, so much liquid evaporates in one hour; but if you remove more than what can evaporate during this time, then your malady will resolve itself through its own spirit animal' extramitat of lu (outside area), there is a bucket kept.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	May it be expelled according to the quantity of his semen and as you understand the disposition of the uterus's seed from head to foot, and its vitality.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: "Extract the instrument, and pour water which causes it all held within by that throat from where rethread is above the chest cavity of this one for whom you are supposed to perforate according to such manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear over the thighs, and pour a large quantity of water on them, then it will heal there in sand ash, massage that area gently, apply oil to soothe, wait for long time at sunlight; this cures that which is treated with dry medicines while being healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	When it comes to the stomach, apply cauterization and place the spoon over its extraction from water, as you have described previously.
Capitol .lv.	The provided text appears to be from an old medical manuscript combining elements of
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	This line in the medieval Latin-influenced language seems to discuss child care, specifically for those who have not yet had their locales (loci) perforated by a catheter due to issues with bladder drainage or ur
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	The line is discussing the conditions of some children who are vomiting and having trouble with their navel area, which serves as an entry point for a catheter. It's possible that due to illness (which has caused them distress), not only have they been nauseous but also may require medical intervention like inserting or maintaining the position of a nasogastric tube through their nostries, possibly connected at some place around their belly button area. The term 'perforat' indicates that there
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	So, after a very brief while or moment as if through the slender part of it (possibly referring to introducing medical equipment such as an endotracheal tube), they have done so carefully. The text likely refers to inserting breathing tubes into patients with precision and care around their spine region for critical
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	This segment appears to discuss medical practice methods in the context of delicate procedures involving some sort of small metal instrument made from steel (possibly a tool for endoscopy or similar procedure) that is applied and tied securely around something, lasting three days or perhaps even longer (.iiii.tre). This suggests an era when such surgical techniques were commonplace but required time-consums intervent
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	In cases where the patient is incontinent, and there are issues with voiding or passing stool (remaughte), then it's appropriate to return that particular medical device back into its position within the body for proper
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If you do not stop the flow of blood (blood), then it is possible that the urine will overflow in this place, and thus harm these organs here.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	May that which causes dislocation be treated with lead from the plumb well, as we have said before, for up to several days until it is strengthened.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	When they are not in their proper place, leading to these problems, the cause is within themselves since it prevents them from urinating at the body parts below (genitals), as the testicles rise above its natural position on the abdomen; and this disease does not originate there, because sperm cannot reach the womb through retrograde ejaculation.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When performing your operation of blood flow, you may injure yourself with water (perhaps this means that during an invasive procedure like bleeding out or draining fluid); pause at the place where you have cut open the vein, and take care for those inside who are healing.
Capitol .lvi.	The provided text appears to be attempting an interpretation of medical terminology from what seems
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	The provided text appears to be a description of medical conditions in what seems like an archaic or stylized form, likely from historical texts where Latin influence merged with other local dialects and terms (such as Italian, Spanish). To provide you with a translation into modern English:
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Movements worsen this pain in the groin and it is an excess of fatty flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	From that one is it harmful (evil) and from the other not (harmlthy).
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	No malignant, cover that suspends under the subtle and removes what'dict within it all together; place pause over that spot submerged in Egyptian wax herein described, and apply this ointment thereto to heal as intended therewith contained:
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If the gallbladder is black in color and ill-conditioned, then it's time to administer pointed cautery on its liver and spleen areas respectively.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	May there be an uncircumcised foreskin on the head of the penis and one part removed while another remains intact; once you have detached what has been cut (the circumcision), hold it within until solidification occurs, then attend to that which was previously separated. Furthermore, even after securing this separation during healing, there is a risk it may retract.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	Return that healing remedy within him where it will be safe; this translates as "Return the curative substance so that it remains inside, ensuring its safety." Here' extraneous conjunction
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If there is a flow of blood involved, administer the luna-shaped instruments in this manner. Here it suggests that when bleeding (blood flow) accompanies joint pain possibly related to gout as described earlier, specific methods or tools should be used for treatment
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Quar luna-shaped instruments can serve as two types of tools: one is for the flow of blood and the other when they become corrupted (diseased or impure). Here it implies that these specialized medical devices are intended to address both bleeding due to illness, possibly relating back to gout treatment with associated joint inflammation
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	If the head of the veil is corroded and destroyed in an instant, then place a lead pipe into the scrotum to allow for drainage through that channel; this means introducing a tool (the lead pipe) to create a passageway so urine from the affected area can be expelled. Here it suggests using primitive medical intervention – likely as part of early treatment strategies during medieval times, where draining excess fluid would have been necessary in cases such as epididymitis or testicular torsion (conditions that might cause acute pain and inflamm
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the attachment of the prepuci at its head (where it joins with the foreskin, and here no circumcision is required; that area does not need excising), when adhesion occurs due to dirt or scab—then scrape a blunt spatula inside where the ligament has dissolved, removing completely even the head of the prepuci. Here it describes an early surgical procedure possibly used in medieval medicine: cleanly cutting away any stuck foreskin (prepuci) with adhesions using scraping tools like sharp stone or metal spatulas to remove both skin and scar tissue after dirt has been removed from the area where ligaments are affected. It reflects a rudimentary yet practical approach to address male genital issues in times when medical understanding was limited, without relying on modern surgical equipment or techniques. This procedure may have involved personal skill and experience rather than standardized procedures as understood today.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	If it is difficult to desire those exquisitely, then cover your spine and penis with some cloth as quickly as possible to find the cause of pain at the head of the verge and prepuce, so that when you do perforate them gently due to their delicacy.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Return the separation between the foreskin and the head of hair above the pubic bone delicately inserted undernegy (underly), which is already submerged in phlegmatic fluid, so that it does not adhere to other humors.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Return its healing is in that very strict place where it has been solidified.
Capitol .lvii.	The provided text seems like an attempt at translating medieval medical terminology into English with a
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	In the simplification and care of those boys who have undergone circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuity with other diseases: but when it comes from our operation and willpower, and in children specifically, we must assign them to the better treatment course as quickly as possible for salvation.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Thus, they say that ancient ones did not perform circumcision around the time of liberty, nor do so in their laws today, and only have them for experimentation purposes. This is why most artisans and barbarians use new razors and knives; using leather straps and scalpels (or cutting tools with a sharp edge).
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	E you have already performed all these methods and found no better formulation with thread or sinew in the dressing, where threads escape from below the waistline, down to the peritoneum between two tunics (layers of clothing), tightening up bodily tissue. Here comes a more comprehensive understanding for alleviating pain without further complication:
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And here is where they perform a purification (mundificación), using digits (the ones used by surgeons or surgical tools), which are not securely fastened within the body'thy member, and it can easily enter into thy womb.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	May enter blood during surgery with a sharp sword or rust and ruin your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The natural tongue of a child is short by nature, and continuous movements do not require polishing, which has been observed by you.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	May the manufacturing that makes nails and ligaments of my flesh be fashioned with proportional thickness; thus being in accordance with their natural hardness as they are when touched lightly—therefore if you understand how to proportion two such levels, apply them accordingly at one time; this compression of the foot' extrusion contains the entire knucklebone (ankylosis), and here there is no error whatsoever.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The first sentence to translate: The main thing about the initial operation is that you make sure the patient'supremely much', and only place your hand in their groin as little as possible; allow them entry into the other day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Return that joy throughout all of your body, as it is within your reach for what you receive in understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Here you prepare to ensure that he is not frightened and keep your fingers or tools hidden from the child so they do not see them; this helps maintain a sense of security for him during treatment.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Here comes the translation:
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Here comes the translation of each line into English:
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the translation:
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of these instruments indicates this way:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	They are some bones outside the joints and others inside them, which should not be beyond the reach of the claw, and whose length matches that of two handles used with hands.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	May mistakes in clarification be few and easily avoided entirely by understanding yourself inside out.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, when you stretch it out of your hour on the wound' extraneous part and place that secondly in equality with its own moisture.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	If you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract that which is inside and incise it therein.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it has passed three days, and the poultice applied to the inflamed point is moistened with dew in the morning hours as directed by doctors; then apply that which you have prepared for excoriation of said soft lesion (which represents pus or some similar discharge), at your command.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	Guard your head of courage, for it will not be enough here.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	So take care of that water which strengthens dust particles recommended in the treatment of these fine grains (presumably referring to medicinal herbs or substances used for pulmonary conditions).
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If it has entered through the navel in proper measure, and you observe its parts below, do not notice it at all.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	May he take care of that water which we have brought inside so it may be cured.
Capitol .lviii.	The provided text seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise that blends
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	When referring to the care for retained urine in the bladder, here is the translation:
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retain urine in the bladder as it may be due to excessive flesh accumulation or stone formation within/from stones or fistulas, resembling those mentioned by healers for curative purposes during division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not expelled and remains for some time in the place where it already is, which is at the neck of the bladder, make sure that the urethra does not press upon their loins.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Here comes the text to translate line by line into English:
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then, when the neck of the bladder has been contracted back to its parts behind (so that), the urine is completely expelled.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If there is no dissolution of the fluid we have mentioned beforehand and it becomes vehemently painful upon extraction using an instrument that you call (the syringe), here comes a source sentence to explain: It may be made from silver or subtle lion, with delicate precision like the tip of a long finger or middle finger.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When it is necessary that urine collection for him who grips and lies outside of this fabric, you insert the external parts of the instrument into the hollow part near the bladder; then cut away any superfluous material with scissors if there's a cause within the wool, otherwise place directly in the catheter following urgency.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	When one applies the malady on the sole of the foot and binds the bladder, vein, and ligament together with oil and wine,
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Here comes the translated text line by line:
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Expose gradually the metal (the cautery) in fleece small by small, until it is completely covered with wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Return that part for cleansing with urine and apply a compress; do not cease to use the washer (ciringua) until the bladder and hernias are relieved, easing their discomfort.
Capitol .lix.	The provided text seems like an attempt at translating medieval medical terminology into English
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	When the enema (clister) is prepared and similar instruments are brought, which align with it in purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When ulcers or abscesses occur in the bladder, or when it'supinated (turned over), and you want to drain them hereby taking water and medicines with a tool that is clamped for this purpose; these are how things stand.
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	sino que in the exterior of it is silent, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that way there are three troubles: twice from one side.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the meal is calmness found, in which it draws and whereupon its second quantity ascends above that drawn by those humidities, when any cause lifts such from these fluids; furthermore, once expelled, again to be pulled back at will of this fluidity. And whenever lifted long enough beyond return, then naphtha appears within the wounds suffered in sea battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So when you want to prevent moisture in the bladder, insert the extremity of clogs into the moisture, and draw it out towards that water which pushes down on the parts below, wherein the moisture is drawn upwards.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Return the intestine or hernia into its cavity; and propel the moisture that you are expelling, which goes directly down towards the bladder, and thus it causes malady.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the clyster under which the bladder becomes distended is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And whether it is silver or side-based pain, they have placed the head as if to a small feather on him/her and quickly inserted lancet into his/her limb.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Return the bladder to its place, and stop there where moisture wants to condense in the bladder, between two strong ligaments of the falciform tendon (double-sided), and heat that moisture over the focus.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Return the limb'dictor in its cavity, and place your hand over it so that the limb dictator does not protrude.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If there is no bladder present, take a pillow made of pargament and make from that circle; pierce through the entirety of its surface; firmly insert faithfully into those disruzymes, as you will induce it to revolt; secure additional rounds also in accordance with your wishes. Place yourself within that water which contains these humidities while adding said waters and oils (likely medicinal concoctions).
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return your tool to it in the instrument and apply as you have applied into the bladder, and express that moisture enters the bladder through your hand.
Capitol .lx.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical document written
De extraccio de peyra.	From stone." (This line is in Latin, and it seems like the beginning of some direction
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We already have it in the division of stones and care for them as medicine, and the difference between stone formed on urine and that originating from bladder." (This translation into English interprets a likely instruction or observation regarding medical treatment approaches to different types of kidney stones during medieval times.)
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	We have it where the operation takes place and sectioning." (Here again Latin is used with an indication that there'sintervention in a specific area of treatment—likely referring to surgical procedures for kidney stones
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The stone originating from the bladder is precisely that which stays in the bladder." (This line distinguishes between stones formed inside and outside of a bodily cavity—specifically, it implies understanding when an obstruction occurs internally within structures like the ur
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And he reports that which is exposed herein and made brief." (The speaker seems to be summarizing or commenting on content previously discussed, possibly medical observations related to stones.) The overall context
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	So it is said that the stone originating from the bladder mainly affects children; and their urine, when evacuated from the bladder, resembles water in subtlety, appearing therein like sand; while stones are rubbed on its rim by hands or tweezers (veges), and those responsible for it dress up—these they take to town square as evidence." (This translation suggests that a particular type of stone disease predominantly impacts children. The resemblance in urine color is metapsologically described, likening its clarity or translucency to water with sand-like granules visible when the flow occurs through an instrument known possibly as a 'cuve'—a container for collecting and examining bodily fluids.) Additionally, individuals (potentially caretakers) physically handle stones from patients by rubbing them on rims. They then present these findings in public to emphasize their evidence or symptoms of the condition being discussed – possibly an effort at diagnosis confirmation or for community awareness during a time when
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is a healing for those children within that have reached twelve years old, and treatment in the limbs is difficult.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	May happen in young people between those waters (possibly referring to body fluids or humors).
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	From which stone (or material) it is made of if its weight is heavy and the cure seems easier to apply lightly on top; If however it's scanty or small in quantity, contrary to that one.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	So when approaching the treatment of that, cover their thighs with a linen wool from which we extract out all holes where it has escaped into your tubes; thereafter this hole may be occasionally prohibited to prevent further blockage by dirt or stone particles being investigated.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Return its position in their thighs and contents are excessive or gouty for it that bone may descend into the bladder'se socket, or jump out of place a few times.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Here comes the first source sentence: Return that cautery you have prepared within yourselves, and all of them are now things from themselves, so that the bladder as a whole descends gradually into parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Return (or restore) that part which is diseased completely.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel pain in the space (possibly referring to a hernia), then pull your cushion so much over it there.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	If you do not touch the entire body at once, then take out some oil as indicated by the left hand for a young person with flatulence or as shown by the middle finger if completed in youth, and insert it into their bottom.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Through the entry of the stone that has been lodged inside for a while, it enters into the bladder through which urine is discharged.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	When that small one is converted into something within the bladder neck (the area where the urethra meets the bladder), it means repositioning or redirecting what
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And position your hand over that which is said to be there below (likely referring to an area beneath the patient), and expel it from those parts beyond where the bladder resides within its location. In simpler terms, this could mean applying pressure or performing a manual technique on the lower abdomen in order to help urine pass through past the site of
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And commands the minister to press on the bladder with his hand; and orders another minister to extend their arm(s) downwards towards those parts below (likely referring to stimulating muscles or applying pressure in that area), while using their other hand, draw back tightens a catheter which has been inserted into these locations previously for urination assistance.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Return into its place has entered within it, this is how it appears:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And cut the water that is between the knee and thighs not in this place (above the left knee), but on top of it where the leg rests therein; a transverse section to make the segment broad for easy separation according to how much you desire from the bone located there, without exceeding what's necessary as nothing is lacking that which resides within the hollow (of the thighbone).
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	You understand that from the stone there is some wherefrom whence removal of it will be difficult by water.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	From that fluid it appears like a lion, round and made of bloodletting; this is what must be extracted from the body.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore adjust it in the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	If there is not a hole made for catheterization (foregoing the term 'fore-getted', which may refer to an indwelling device like a drain or tube), then you must create one over that, whereby if stretched upon the skin it will have its limit and won't slip away; else insert gradually your slender instrument of curvature undernethy.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot cover it there, then increase the disruption slightly and if you see a flow of phlegm present, sever that which has been previously treated with sulphur melted thrice.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the stone is within one of them (the body parts being referred to), then you will lead it into the mouth of the bladder, and place your hand over that part; also carry a small amount with you—it appears as pains from diseases.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If there is much pain (or intense suffering), it is due to ignorance that you have immersed the large section of your body herein, which leads to harm in either its staying or departure from continuous urine discharge; hence, the location is not fully consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	May you administer the removal of it within which has gone out (likely referring to a substance or organ that needs extraction), either by hand when outside, or with instruments during fracture breaks where they are inside as forceps extracting it into pills.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with Aloe and dragon'se sanctus (likely referring to a plant or substance used for its healing properties), and strengthen it furthermore.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And on that cloth steamed with oil and vinegar or water steam, to ensure the applied poultice softens it down.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Return the belly over the patient's chest and do not loosen the sinew within it by daybreak.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	When that air escapes, apply water and oil herein within so that it heals therewith.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	May you cauterize the wound if it is inflamed and decayed (and seems like its bladder has frozen), for then insert the tube into the bed, remove that sack, which may provoke further deterioration of both the bladder and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Return the water with vinegar and salt therein; all else is against it, as far as healing waters are concerned that come for you within which cure them.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	During all of the healing process, when you have both knees and thighs open, adjusting the stopped remedies on this location.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the stone is small and located in the bladder, and it stays therein, injection of urine is prohibited; otherwise healing occurs due to this treatment directed at ascending stages, which have been previously accused as a blockage. You already extracted the substance (urine), now you take hold of an iron knife for puncturing—this is its form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	From outside the womb, gout is found in a pipe (likely referring metaphorically as it's not literally possible). Here are my translations for each line of the source text
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And secure with fidelity to that stone (possibly referring to an urinary calculus or bladder stone), thus keeping it from returning back into the bladder vessel/urinary tract. Here's my translation: And ensure faithfulness, anchoring at that jagged stone so as not for it to go back into the blad
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And insert iron within that stone with ease while using the puncture tool to reach into that pit/stone. Here's my translation: And introduce metal wire into that stone effortlessly, guided by a needle-like instrument directly towards that cavity/stone defect. The translations provided attempt to convey medieval medical terminology and practices as they relate to gout treatment in the context of urinary tract
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the puncture tool within that small pit/stone gradually until it pierces through, allowing for your other hand to make contact with another portion of the stone and push downwards—ultimately releveasing the bladder contents at once (this suggests a technique used in urethral catheterization). Here's my translation: And gently turn that puncture instrument within that small pit/stone incrementally until it penetrates, while your other hand makes contact with another segment of the stone and exerts downward pressure—ultimately emptying out (or
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And place your hand over the area where it has been broken away from that stone'thy part outside of its cavity—here resides a hole through which urine flows out and into healing (this refers to post-procedural care, likely after fragment removal or catheterization). Here is my translation: And position your hand over the location where it has been detached from that stone's exterior cave — here there’s an opening for urine flow which leads towards its restoration. The translated lines follow medieval medical language and convey specific procedures related to managing stones within the bladder,
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this cure is not within your reach for any reason that prevents you from doing so, then apply a poultice immediately to the skin, and another paste below it as well.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Return above the bone in that groove between ribs.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Return that outwardly (or) draw it forth outside; in this context likely referring
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Draw back the ligament and moisten the inflamed joint with salve made from mud here on earth—this likely means to apply healing balm or ointment prepared using natural materials like soil (represented by "plagna" which could be understood as common dirt, ground substances
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary for the patient to have foul urine (implying poor health or impure substances), but rather so that it does not return into the bladder; and another ligament above, unless when this part of the anatomy—the egressive vein from the penis—has been drawn away with forceps as mentioned earlier ('la egrixcio'), which then returns to its original place in society (body) and reclaims its position among people.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	When it is necessary for you to lift the underside of his/her penis upwards towards the parts beneath (presumably during a procedure), raise your hand accordingly and restore what was previously taken out together with children who were present at that moment.
Capitol .lxi.	The provided Latin-like text seems like it is translating an old medical practice
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	From the stone of women'thy womb, here begins our translation: "From the stone (or perhaps a metaphorical reference
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	The line translates to English as follows: “Stone in the woman’s body is seldom produced.” This suggests that, according to medieval medical belief (
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	The translated sentence would read: “If there is a stone in any of them (the women), it’s difficult to cure and its removal by forceful means is forbidden.” This highlights the perceived complexity or impossibility of removing such stones without causing harm, according to medieval medical doctrine. In modern terms, this may metapthyically refer to conditions like kidney stones which can
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The line translates as: “One of them is the woman with fair skin.” Here we are referring possibly to a specific case or type within medieval medical texts that categorizes individuals
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	The translated sentence would read: “Another is the woman with dark skin that you cannot extract from a doctor when she takes it out.” This indicates an observation made in medieval medicine regarding extraction of impurities (which might be interpreted as black bile, one of the four humors) based on physical characteristics such as skin color. In contemporary language, this reflects early misconceptions about bodily fluids and their
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The line translates as: “Pure is the woman who knows this art; mainly through operation.” Here we are discussing a situation where purity in women (perhaps referring to balance of humors or spiritual/moral cleanliness) can be achieved primarily by surgery
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The translated line would read: “And the location of this stone in a woman’s body is longer than that of the stone itself; therefore before extraction, one must seek out where it has lodged.” This sentence suggests an acknowledgment within medieval medical texts regarding how to locate and subsequently extract supposed stones from women's bodies – possibly referring not only physically but also metaphorically in terms of spiritual or bodily purity. In modern terminology: the implication might be related to understanding where
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If it is necessary to induce sweating (to treat the condition), then take hold of a female medical student'sear and apply gently without causing discomfort.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	May you lack that which is necessary (if so), then seek the assistance of a skilled midwife attending women in childbirth or another woman proficient in this task from here onwards.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, command that which you present to him now, and direct it so he can take all the water you give him from inquisition of the stone until communion; this cause leads as when a woman sees her vagina at the foot of his body and wishes for entry.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	So if you clench that one down quickly, and then commands it to sink into that area.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	May it not be a sign of illness; if so, the matron directs that her duty is inserted into the cavity of the sickbed and positioned over the bedpost, placing one hand on the left bladder for support, ensuring no leakage occurs.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	So if you abuse it, gradually increase that which is orrified in the bladder to its parts above until reaching the entrance of the hernia whereby by virtue will come into being at this place.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Here is the line-by-line translation of the provided medieval medical treatise:
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	E understand that the stones of pepper are movements: some few and large, like a lion or sharp aspen, elongated and round, with ridges (or protrusions).
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Thus you understand how many spices are needed for what you indicate about this that will come.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you see the flow of blood escaping, adjust it in the glass where it has been trisected and place your hand there so that the bleeding stops, after which return to your operation until the wound is healed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you see flux of rheum (indicating a discharge or exudation), and know that its expulsion is due to the insidious arsenic (arsenicum impurity affecting health), then place powder over the location, gently apply pressure with pebbles and strictures downward without further interference; keep pressing it until there'thy improvement. Here, by not removing what has been expelled naturally but instead applying gentle measures to relieve symptoms caused by such impurities, you may see recovery of the patient (malady).
E aprop cura la plagua.	Return care for the child (or possibly "return tender loving care" or similar interpretation
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the sharpness of pain heightens each day, and it occurs here (implying now or during this specific time), you return to your work until the stone is crushed down/ground away.
Capitol lxii.	Capitol xviii. (Assuming 'L' represents Roman numer
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	El texto que has proporcionado parece ser una frase en español, probablemente relacionada con
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	El texto que has proporcionado trata sobre una hernia hidrococelear o inguinal (conocida en español como "aygua"), la cual se caracteriza por el ascenso de agua dentro del canal femoral, donde está contenido el intestino. Esta condición puede llevar a un aumento significativo de presión y descompresión que resultaría en una hernia abdominal visible o palpable cerca de las coyas
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	El texto describe un proceso por el cual se forma una hernia debido a tensión en el tejido pangennial (proprio peritoneum), especialmente cerca de la región inguinal donde está ubicado y sostiene los intestinos, dentro del canal femoral. Menciona que hay otra presencia allí ya sea otro órgano hueco como un segmento íleo o parte distal del colon (entroque cuidat), añadiendo tensión al área preexistente entre la inguinal fossa y el ligamento inguinal, no siendo solo una simple acumulación de líquido sino algo más tangible
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	La generación de esta hernia se debe a una causa desconocida mencionada como "debilidad" que afecta directamente al intestino (genéticos), permitiendo la salida o expulsión del contenido interno hacia el área externa, donde puede ser palpable. Además, algunas de estas hernias pueden manifestarse a través del sonido emitido cuando se aplica presión física directamente sobre los intestinos (percussio fayta). Estas descripciones reflejan la comprensión
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	Here is the line-by-line translation:
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And for the joints where this addition of water is present: if it' extricated from our white cloth as we have mentioned before (the poultice), and appears like a bubble in one long soaking session, then moisture throughout the entirety will be reduced.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If moisture is present in the patient's pancreas, then there will be an abscess formation which comes out of it and thus makes him appear as another humer (shoulder).
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If there is moisture between the navel and the umbilicus (belly button), then it will be in the center of the body.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	When you wish to learn about the color of humidity, observe the moisture in which it enters where its form is preceded; and as soon as this comes into contact with your skin at that place, look for the same type of moisture therein.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	So when we come to the care of him who is suffering from gout and it's possible for you to cauterize with iron (referring to treating joint pain caused by cold humors), then sometimes apply pressure on his body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	When it rests on its two sides due to any cause or reason, and intermittently lifts the woolen cloths quickly.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Set the piece of cloth on the left side of him/her, and command the servant to follow the right side of him/her, extending their staff two lengths from under the collarbone down to the waist area between the stomach part (midriff) and navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	When applying pressure with a liniment and dividing the neck of the thyroid gland within its limited space,
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And if it is the second section that has been straightened out from the line below which should be directed towards the pubic bone so as to reach the white chestnut comprehending (the navel or umbilicus).
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Excise that, and observe carefully so you do not re-injure it; your excision will be according to the severity of inflammation as much as possible within what is feasible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Return throughly the bladder of water is pierced for drainage and all the water will be extracted.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Here is the line-by extralined translation:
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E inspects it within or on pillows, mainly his subtle self; if you do not examine its nature precisely, there is no guarantee that water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	May it happen if the instrument proceeds from that region beyond your cushion during your operation time; when you have completed the section of the slippage (of hernia), return it there and adjust the lips of the genital cushions, taking care as with other creatures. Here is the translation line by line:
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	If you have corrupted the humors by another illness, then take care of those vessels through which the humor flows and extract the excess humors, taking into account what we have mentioned earlier.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	If water is added to any parts of the body, you will understand that these are hernias; therefore inspect and incise that part where you have previously cut in another area; if it's an operation for you, then perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Take away the sanction and introduce them into wool soaked in oil or vinegar-soaked; hold back another piece of such wool that you have submerged in wine and oil, stretching it over two thighs (the abdomen) and above. Then pause beneath folded towels and pullovers, holding them together with the same thread as follows:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Here is the translation line by line:
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And some times this hernia is treated artificially with pointed cautery at the site of detachment; and it so happens that you grasp a delicate pointed cauterization instrument under your thumb, inserted into the belly button area where white speckled water (pus) has been discovered inside, then proceed as follows:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And they come together in Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Through that opening in the belly, and it is lit within where all moisture will be expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Return the sinew or tendon that is cut, and cleanse it with razor sharp instruments for precise incisions; proceed until you have eliminated everything within reach of your blade. Be mindful not to let the flame touch the steel of your tool.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	Be aware that this operation is safe and prevents loss of blood flow, better than cauterization with a ligature (or tie).
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	May if you find that an abscess forms when draining or performing drainage (curettage), which is what happens to you now, then attend immediately to the treatment as indicated hereafter.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	May if the patient is in pain, and does not hope for a second operation due to its horror, then apply as recommended by us; when you have verified that it has been said about their significance, which means this hernia is indeed swolthy (or large).
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	When you make an incision in the spleen over any raised area on the patient' extraneous body (presumably referring to a swollen limb or region), puncture the abscess below the pubis bone at the lower part of the spine, and stop piercing according to the length of time.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	When I have opened wide where the water runs throughout it all.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Return your hand over the area where it has been placed therein and move that one as well to ensure they do not spill into the water of life (bloodstream).
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Return that which must be healed within (or inside), for it is necessary therefor; do so carefully and maintain your hand over this area, in order not to
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	Return what must be healed within (or inside), for it is necessary therefor: the water thus created by piercing isn't poison but arises from white lint in the patient’sfurniture, causing opposition and prohibiting its own treatment; consequently, if you place anything into the patient's furniture, beware of what causes extraction (presumably a medical tool), which is preceded this way. Adjust within the confines of the patient's furniture something small in size for correction or management.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	E understand that water returns and is drawn back according to the physician'se method over months or until those days are passed; when it has accumulated, then as per that specific doctor's technique, the humidity will penetrate through.
Capitol .lxiii.	The text provided appears as if it is written in Medieval Latin with some influences from
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	It seems like the phrase you've given translates to something along these lines: "Regarding the fatty cushion and its healing." Here is a possible interpretation
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Your translation appears to convey the following: "You fear being lost in this chapter about hernias, so that I see its release and salvation through it." Here is an interpretation of each line for clarity:  
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And remember that operation in which those instruments were used.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	So say that the swelling occurs in the joints where tendons are attached and pain comes due to acute excess or impact: either it bursts into the joints, or because of a hit.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And according to its colour following that of the body, it is not in vain for pain, and severe inflammation occurs herein.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	When it is opened (the wound), its color is black and has not healed yet at this location.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Some movements may cause pain due to the contraction of those joints where it has already been noticed a memory or swelling in them, either because they are inflamed (of that very place), or because there is an inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	May that which is for inflammation of the joints be known through separation by incision when you compress it with those bands, and do not touch it thereafter.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	May that which is pained by inflammation of a vein not be scattered from here due to any cause, and it should receive compression in those places.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Then if it is that flesh has hardened there, remove the fat and insert what you have taken out.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	If there is adhesion within any cause of chyle or between the vessels, then you must release all that adhesion and inject it in a circular manner through injection.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If the location of meat is behind where it currently lies, then insert all that you find there from within its cavity, and extract with care what has been inside as if we have already discussed this matter together.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	So once your operation is complete, fill the wool with oil and vinegar, and carefully ensure that it receives proper care until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capitol .lxiv.: This line appears to be an index or reference
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	From cure of the wretchedness that is within." - The translation here suggests a medieval medical context where "vizio" (w
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vit is an encapsulating wraparound similar to seed pods that helps alleviate the discomfort of the testicles; it makes difficult exercise and walking over the hernia." - In this line, a remedy involving some form of encompthy wrapping (possibly with materials like cloth or plant fibers) resembling seedpod casings is described. It's intended to provide relief for pain associated with an inguinal/inguinal region due to the presence of hernia ("mala
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	In curing this ailment, out of fear for what has come before it." - Here the focus is on the notion that treating hernias might be driven by concerns related to past experiences or occurrences (possibly referring to complications from previous conditions). It highlight
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, when we speak of curing this affliction after experiencing the firsts," - This suggests a discussion about treatment approaches to hernias that occurs following an initial incident or experience with such conditions (perhaps referring to different methods
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And say that what you do should elevate the hernia over an upright hook; and fix the testicles' suspenders at their joints’ parts below knees (which are called bays); hold those other servants, which belong to others like yourself, tightly extended – with great force." - This line appears to describe a treatment technique where something is elevated over an upright hooking device for the management of hernias. It indicates placing suspenders or straps at specific points on someone else's body (likely their thigh joint) and holding additional objects tightly, potentially as part of supportive therapy during procedures to address inguinal/inguinal region issues associated with a patient’s genitalia ("codena dels genetius"). The term "bays" might refer to specific anatomical areas used in this context. It's important to note that the exact nature and purpose of these objects ('am extencio
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Return (apply) pressure on the spine with arsenic gout across this section, within where the vessels have been discovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Return what has been taken out from all parts during extraction, using an iron scraper where the extracted items are located in the altars.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Here is the line-by-line translation of the given medieval medical text into English:
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Apply care for this worm in these other plagues whereby diseases are caused by falling drops of which two generations do not need healing from it here.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	May you pour wine on all the vessels, provided that their testicles are outside or where they may be drawn into them, thus depriving them of nourishment for the vessels and ensuring they do not thrive therein.
Capitol .lxv.	Capitol .lxv.: This line appears to be referencing Roman numerals (
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	From "the treatment of intestinal protrusion." Here, the author seems to begin discussing a specific method
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The arrival of this hernia is due to a section whereby it extends over the stomach's interior cavities; thus when these intestinal protrusions reach towards the internal sections, they indicate a breach in those areas. Here, "the advenment" likely refers to the occurrence or manifestation of an inguinal hernia within the groin area (where angunars could be understood as parts/angulae). The use of Latin-influenced language suggests this text comes from a time when medical terms were not standardized, and such phrases would have been common
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This rupture is either of the cushion or due to discontinuity; these organs are purged for various reasons: by hitting (percussio), pressing down on them forcefully with instruments such as a screwdriver handle, crying out loudly enough that it causes strain and potential injury ("sautz"), through strong coughing spells or violent exertions of any kind; because they are affected due to the reasons like these: hitting upon something hard (percussio), by applying pressure with instruments such as a screwdriver handle, loud crying out (clamor), raising up from physical strain caused perhaps during strenuous activities ("elevatio"),
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	When the cushion is extended and causes strain over long periods without healing properly (not curing), it develops a lesion within its flesh, which then protrudes into one's abdomen through specific body openings around where this padding resides. In translation: Whenever there’s extension of the cushion that leads to persistent discomfort over time without proper healing ("no accideys soptament"), it results in a sore or lesion (apostema) inside, which then emerges through body openings near where this padding is situated. Here "extencio" likely relates not only physical stretching but also
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	E the patient'thy condition is when it reaches its section of the chest cavity; then various apparent signs appear on the area adjacent to where support has been provided for this region, and because of what comes out of the bowel (implying constipation or obstruction), as well as from their body parts.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And in some cases, belly fat is pushed out of place (the intestine), and it is called this intestinal protrusion.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Some days it is pain caused by winds, and some days the intestine protrudes through an open fistula (hole), where it gets stuck due to great dishonor of the humors in the uterus; on these occasions there comes more intense and severe pain when pushed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In treating this illness' spices we have fear that it may be avoided in the same place.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The given text is an ancient medical advice likely from the medieval period in Europe where Latin and regional languages like Italian, Spanish had significant influence on each other's vocabulthy and grammar. Here’s my translation line by line:
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	If it is at all possible that from there will come out, as much of that which has entered through the hole (likely referring to fluid or pus coming out).
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Return that scraping tool (which could be an instrument used for cleaning or exfoliating) to those places where the white hardened spermatic ducts have been discovered, once they are exposed after being hidden within them by time and dirt.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	When you insert the urine into this bowl that holds his testicle, in between these white circles where it is under the cord of the urethra and behind the second circle, which releases any adhesion present at the back end of the body part referred to here.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	When it is about these teeth that have not any cause for the intestine wrapped in white hard substance,
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you remove any cause from there quickly, then you will empty it into its abdomen immediately.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Here comes the line to translate: E prop envolveys las extremidades del campo y aquelas am liament vehement entro donde, al cuydado de los vasos que no hayan introducido ninguna causa para suceder apestía cautérica.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	E pause another bandage following the first one around the waist three days; and apply these two bands to tighten the scrotum as much as its size dictates, tracing all over the body roundly, then remove it from there.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Then insert into the section below the navel, by which sanction and sickness come forth as we have described in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Apply wool soaked in oil and placed on dirt; apply linen which has been rubbed (and some bleeding is stopped using a cauterized vein that we have mentioned for fear of blood flow, as frequent movements cause these flows), letting it fall into itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the application of mercury is delayed, then pour it down like a waterfall into that which falls as we speak.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	When one care is provided for other illnesses within which it has healed,
Capitol .lxvi.	The provided text appears to be from an ancient medical document discussing treatments for joint pain
De hernia ventosa.	Given that "herniatus" refers to a condition involving the protr
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this situation with an escroto (an escaped intestine or other organ that has moved through muscular walls), it's noted that there hasn’t yet been a successful intervention to restore the herniated tissue back inside its normal position within your body. Here
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	In the initial days of this condition (herniation), it was recommended that you apply dressings directly to where an abscess has formed due to the hernia; and secure them dry in place so as not to exacerbate or spread what already exists inside, ensuring they remain fixed until these interventions take effect. Here's a translation into English:
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And when the child is healed as we have discussed before,
Capitol .lxvii.	The given text appears as though it could be an amalgamation of different linguistic influences
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	From the pain that is felt in the joints." (Translation assumes a general meaning, interpreting 'disropo' as suffering or being robbed of something
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some warnings break down in the joints when they have itching sensations and migrate to where." (Translation interprets 'endeve' as a type of warning or reaction occurrs with an uncomthy feeling that moves within/to specific locations.) In simpler terms: "Occasionally,
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And if there are causes of bubbles within the wombs (which is another way to say 'genitals' or related structures in medical terminology), then they are few, and return into them at all times." The sentence seems complex due to archaic language mixing; here’s a clearer interpretation: "If there were any bubbles within the genital area (like gonorrheal blister-forming lesions which can
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the time of applying heat is prolonged, adjustments are made in order to keep the cautery within its place; and as this heats up the cavity (which can be understood metaphorically), it causes an extension into that area where discomfort has been felt on the joints. This results not only from expansion of said heat but also aids softening of the site with attention given to those areas experiencing distress." The sentence translates as follows:
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	The treatment of him is with pointed cautery as it has been described for him.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And in some treatments according to this methodology, the hump lies on their back between your two legs, and it is dried out for three days as directed by the course of action.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	When strength is given to the white thread that has been found within the cords,
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Return (or place) the thread and pause it over the prominent part of the navel area, pressing down on that above the stomach.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	Return and adjust the two locations above the tip of the thigh bone (femur), aligning one with the other using stitches from among those provided.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Return the limb to its position and do not press into or extend it beyond the coccyx in totality; nor any other cause that may arise while treating for intestinal protrusion (herniated disc).
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And in this place, they have placed it better for health.
Capitol .lxviii.	The given text is not in English but appears similar to various Romance languages with some Latin influence which
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	In the context of male reproductive health, specifically referring to an intervention related to treating or alleviating pain from something affecting the
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	When addressing the treatment of discomfort in males' scrotum (testicles), it is indicated that for certain conditions affecting tissues between these organs to be alleviated or soothed, and after which close monitoring should follow as per medical guidance. This reflects a traditional approach where manual intervention aimed at reducing localized edema may provide relief from associated pain in cases of scrotal swelling (possibly due to varicocele), with subsequent observation for changes indicative of improvement or
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Following this procedure aimed at treating the male urethra (where fluid leakage occurs), which involves addressing any swelling within that region, and enclosing everything in its natural scrotum cavity where soothing was previously applied—this necessitates close supervision for two days. In addition to this treatment approach, appropriate adjustment of the lips or labia is required if surgical suturing (stitches) has been performed as part of repair and care. Here it implies a post-surgical management phase focusing on wound healing within that short period with particular attention given to any alterations in genital hygiene necessitated by the procedure, potentially indicative of steps for
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	Moreover if you wish to include an additional measure in the treatment regimen—this would involve three or four heating applications of scrotum care, followed by firm stitching as part of wound management and recovery process after such medical interventctl; this suggests a combination therapy approach where heat application might be used for pain relief and to promote blood flow (as an adjunctive treatment),
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Return incisions between the sutures, and apply care for other afflictions within to heal them and cleanse the fields (or wounds).
Capitol .lxix.	Given that "Capitol" could refer to an article or section within a larger
De castracio.	In reference to Act V, this implies it's the
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	In Act V of this medical text or legal document (assuming "Capitol" refers to such), it'dicts that castration is forbidden by law in our country; however, I remind myself now about the matter because there are two reasons for doing so: firstly—whenever a doctor addresses me on these issues and explains how they should be treated (the treatment of this issue); secondly, when we need to castrate other animals like horses or oxen for their health as well as ours; even if necessary due to motion needs similar to mules but different from donkeys.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	So it is said that gonorrhea occurs in two ways: through withdrawal (atroction), or by tearing of the section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	When it is caused by drawback, the way of treatment is to make a fish in tail water so long as the kidneys of that person are softened and made flexible and hanging downwards.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Return these things into your hand so that they become resolution and do not appear again after touching.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	May pain occur in the scrotum due to a crack or tear; you hold and press on the patient'dicts' left testicles with your hand, whereby alleviating their discomfort (This translation is based purely on interpreting medieval medical terminology into modern English). The sentence implies that there may be pain in the scrotum due to a fracture or tear. To relieve this patient experiencing such condition
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then adjust the belt and trace over each part contained within two hours of processing time (This translation interprets medieval medical terminology into modern English). The sentence suggests that after taking appropriate measures, one should monitor or check on specific areas every two hours following a certain procedure involving timing elements. This could refer to dressings being checked for tightness/loosen
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then trace over those discharges that you may find (This translation interprets medieval medical terminology into modern English). The sentence implies examining or tracing the presence of any sores, ulcers, or le
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Then do not treat these under external causes but rather the subtle humor that is over the fluids (This translation interprets medieval medical terminology into modern English). The sentence indicates a focus on internal imbalances, specifically related to bodily humors or fluid balance, and suggests treatment should target this underlying issue instead of addressing only
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This scrotal discomfort is better than the one caused by pressure; heavy lifting often leads to a desire for relief from pain in the patient's genital area (Translating this into modern English, it suggests that physical strain or excessive effort can exacerbate localized pain and implies seeking rest as remediation). The sentence discusses different types of discomfort within the scrotum—physical pressure versus possibly heavy labor. It indicates a preference for natural healing when one's body see
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And provide care for those within who are healed.
Capitol .lxx.	The provided text appears to describe some aspects of medical practices related to joint pain (
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of treating hernias, or protrusion from the body:
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermafrodozia in men is according to two types: one appears when semen enters the belly of the scrotum (where there are spaces between the testicles), and another where a female phallus forms within it, with hairs growing from it.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	Some measures of that fluid present in the bladder found within the scrotum, which is related to it there.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, there is a special aspect: it is that their womb (uterus) sits above the pubic bone with two small pelvic glands below each one like little testicles of man and four in total at the base of these structures.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The cure is composed of three kinds: two from men and one derived from women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	Here comes the sentence to translate: For you have inserted those joints back into where they escaped from therein, and for that treat any other diseases present in them as well.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second species of humans where semen is produced in the region of the coda (of the testicles), there is neither treatment nor opposition here.
Capitol .xxi.	In translating this medieval medical text line by line into English while considering its mixed
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	From slowing down and affecting the flesh, due to reasons related to women's bodies in healthcare context during that time period might indicate an understanding of certain conditions or symptoms as
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	From slowing down due to natural causes and adjusted accordingly, with emphasis on certain measures that are magnified in some women within which activities resemble those of men, occurring during intercourse: Here the text likely discusses hygiene or purification practices particular for females. The reference could relate to a traditional belief about bodily processes influenced by natural causes and societal norms surrounding sexual relations between couples from that era's medical perspective on women’thy healthcare needs, especially in context with menstruation which was often seen as an internal cycle requiring specific attention through these practices or remedies.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Now take away what is excess of washing from your body or womb and insides, as necessary for health restoration.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	Not until deep inside, mainly in the area of the small intestine, so that it does not bring forth a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Return that which is cared for by its own curing of diseases within it so that it may be healed properly.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	May hidden flesh is meat that does not exist in the womb until it fills up therein, and thus I seek to visit those parts thoroughly according to the shape of a rooster (and for this initial call we refer as "malady of the tail"), therefore let us enter here with slow inspection aiming at curing what is within.
Capitol .lxxii.	Capitol LXXII. (Note: The given text does not provide sufficient context
De curacio de alratica.	The phrase "de curacio di arricchice" in English would translate to 
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	When referring to an alar clamp or forceps used for female care (presumably gynecological), the sentence in English means: "The arras should not be pierced through with these instruments, or else a small tear may occur." This implies
E es o natural o accidental.	Indeed, it could imply that any potential damage is either naturally occurring (perhaps
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	The English translation for the continuation of your sentence could be: "It may occur due to illness which has come before it or because of an improperly applied cloth (or gauze) dressing, or perhaps a delicate suture." This indicates that complications such as tears in the alar clamp might arise from pre-existing health conditions, incorrect application during treatment, or even
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	The continuation in English translates to: "It may happen during the mother's pregnancy or on her clothes and skin; from pus that comes out of it (the alar clamp), as well as drainage, suctioning, and childbirth. Furthermore, these actions are strictly prohibited." This suggests that certain interventions around a patient who is experiencing complications related to an arras may be restricted for health or safety reasons in the context of medieval medical practice:
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: When it is known that this ailment (joint pain) results from an imbalance of bodily humors as observed by the physician, then attend thereto accordingly; otherwise, if not apparent, seek out its location either in the throat or on the tongue where mucus can be found.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	May it be for subtlety of intellect and on the lips' palate desires, then use your tongue to separate that which is broken off therein.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	When pressure is applied over the sores on the lips and halts bleeding from more tender areas of the mouth,
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The woman is on her two legs with extended thighs and lips pressed forward so that the subtle cautery below can be dislodged, allowing relief for the patient' extruded part.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Return wool and linen in oil over that place, and anoint the area with honey to ensure it does not harden there.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	Might it be that if the scab is thick and heavy, you must insert either a lancet of ivory or walnut wood into it.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	May it be because of meat (consumption), then lift up that one and incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	When you have the remedies that stop the flow of blood with its biting sensation, apply them when hungry and for gout, thyme, aspirin, adjust according to the blood type (albumma).
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity, and place your hand over it to ensure that dirt is not accumulated there again (literally: "So you can make sure that soil/dirt does not settle in there once more"). Here's a translation line by line
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Hold it (referring to the intestine or hernia) with your hand and administer warm water on those days for cleaning/heating purposes (literally: "You grasp this area, applying warmth through a
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	It will be healed by the other form of care within which it is cured (literally: "This issue, once again being treated with another method herein described"). Here's a translation line by line for each sentence provided in your original medieval
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Some illnesses are born during the springtime of other bodies (referring to people), and it is time-honored that they be listed accordingly according to this tradition/practice (literally: "Certain diseases emerge at birth in others, hence should we note them following these conventions"). Here's a translation line by line for each sentence provided:
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	And if this is due to an affliction of the head (headache), which in springtime does not happen contrary to any seasonal pattern, we shall consider it accordingly within these guidelse/procedures (literally: "If indeed such a condition pertains specifically to cranial discomfort and occurs without deviation from expected patterns as seasons change"). Here's the translation line by line with consideration of medical terminology used in medieval times, which often reflected an intertw
Capitol .lxxiii.	Capitol CXXXIII (where 'CXLIII' translates to Roman
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Regarding the cure of hemorrhoids and tymphoceles that ache in their place within the body's secretion, especially for women (where 'tymphocele(a)' refers to an abnormal fluid collection typically resulting from venous obstruction). Here’s what this line might mean considering historical medical termin
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: From those pores of veins within which blood constantly flows out, and when these purulent swellings appear, they are pains (arthritis).
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And in the division of those things and their respective humors, he directed that which received care shall be treated differently from what does not receive care.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	So it is said that hemorrhoids and varicose veins appear when in the womb of the mother they do not show symptoms, therein lies no treatment with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	May those which are on which mother'thy touch is felt be these that heal;
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	When you place the woman in moist and warm clothes or a rough cloth, and cut those around her joints, look at those areas.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And apply powder on those drippings of the sanctified seed from one of your incisions, with haste and resemblance to these for them.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Return your feet into bed for an hour, and after that pause them in cool water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the flow of blood persists, then it will accumulate in a stone made from wheat bran and barley and resembling gemstones.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Return flour of barley and bread, mixed with honey and vinegar, apply it externally on the two sides of him/her.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the sanction is detached, then bleed it out; otherwise, rub it with two breaths and scrape off its hardening on the breasts (mammillas).
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Apply wool and immerse that part of their colon, or succus from arnica or suc de guarravier in wine, which sticks to the place; care for it so as to heal within.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May Athys request what you need for stern attention, so that whatever has been mentioned earlier in this conversation can be addressed immediately.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	With care for that which is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	The provided text appears as if it were written in an archaic form of Romance
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	When there is a puncture wound from an accident involving the eyes (most likely referring to trauma or injury that affects vision). The translation, considering archaisms
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	There are various worms with sharp spikes in the eye, along with abscesses and ulcerations, bleeding points, inflammation of membranes (which could refer to conditions like conjunctivitis), fistulas from draining pus or fluids due to an infected area. The mentioning of "crane" suggests a reference perhaps not directly related but possibly connected with the overseeing aspect in medieval times when physicians might have been called upon for their expertise, while also implying that these worms are causing severe eye issues requiring medical attention beyond basic first aid ("motas specias").
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And you have described these ailments and the species of those worms (involving possibly ophthalmic parasites) along with their respective cures in this division or section where they are being treated, indicating organized medical knowledge on handling such infestations within medieval medicine. The reference to "senhals" might be a metaphorical way of referring not only the actual physical
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	The section where you find this treatise covers the method of handling a worm infection (likely an ophthalmic infestation) that occurs when these parasites inhabit or proliferate within the eye, and if one wishes to know how it is done effectively—presumably with iron filings. In medieval times without advanced medical technology, treatment such as this would suggest a rudimentary understanding of germ theory; however, practices were often rooted in empirical evidence rather than scientific reasoning that prevailed later centuries. Iron's properties might have been appreciated for its
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	And when you consider the sharp pain of inflammation in their abdomen is palpable and tender to touch, do not press further as it may cause rupture thereof; treat that ailment with whatever helps until the intensity of accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And when you make cuts on the woman'supon a table that has been offered with chopsticks; let her lie down on their back and adjust their weights to slightly above the belly part at intervals, spreading out their knees, holding onto each other's hands occasionally for comfort.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And return (the) mother back to her right place and administer the tool with which she has opened it, according as those causes will bring about.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	When you intend to administer this tool into the woman' extraneous heat of her womb, only allow that which enters therein: the seed and head (possibly referring to conception or fertilization).
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the tool is larger than the patient's breast, then you must pause on the texture of the patient'thy breast so that no part of the whole thing enters into the chest.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	When you pause the flow of blood in the instrument below and hold it with your fingers, while turning inside until it overflows into the moisture offered by the maid, here is what occurs:
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When excitement appears and it touches the hand and back of mine belonging (patient'dict), then cover that which you are removing with a small splint to their head, made from hard stone or metal.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	When illness is cured, then you pause in the mud or oil (which contains some healing properties), and apply pressure to the limb segment where there was a swelling; here are your actions following recovery from sickness.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Pause firmly over the queen and on the clean wool padding submerged in water where they have been boiled:
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Return it is cured with two days of which they will be returned, when inside them heals as well within the time that shall have passed for his recovery.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the child is inflamed in the womb that you are forbidden from treating them here on earth, they have water inside causing it (the condition), and this has been discussed among us before now regarding their division/separation.
Capitol .lxxv.	The given text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discussing
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	This sentence seems like it's written in an archaic or pseudo-Latin style, mixing elements of actual Latin with non-standard grammar and vocabuls (which may be due to a misunderstanding or creative attempt at imitating medieval language). The phrase appears to refer to nurses instructing midwives on how b
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	The text provided is highly complex and involves archaic or non-standard Latin phrases with some understanding of medieval medical terminology mixed in:
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	So when you take those joints, make sure the patient's stomach is compressed so that their unborn child will not be born while they are on their back, give them a second one (possibly referring to another pillow or support), and have it cleaned with this good cleansing agent.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	May that which is not natural and unlawsable occur when the illness overtakes your feet and body (and possibly head), with hands on top of it or under its chest/stomach, tightening around one's own neck—similar to their figure shapes.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	For what reason is it necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these matters, and that she should guard against deceit and disappointment?
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	When showing all of that person' extrinsic features and functions within them are revealed here for the doctor’s understanding at which they stand above or upon it in significance, indicating their state on those grounds themselves.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the pain is on their head for an earthly natural reason and it becomes severe in women and difficult parts of them, they use that servant who holds their hands, which hold these pains and evaporate the phlegm with fenugreek seeds and other humors inside.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Apply a metal tool between your fingers and thighs here at this second place, or tighten that which is within it so as not to let water flow out of there because of moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	Precede gently pressing on the woman'thy abdomen until she delivers the baby.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If not applied, then cover the woman with a mixture of wool and pearl powder to become encrusted like Christ.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	E command them to lie down, apply the crusts herein so that it can heal properly and let their mouth and nose breatfal until such time when they are ready through an opening made by a doctor or gatekeeper (forughet).
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	If more than one wound from childbirth is present on the abdomen (forepart), then it must be reduced gradually with gentle motions.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	Mayhaps if she does not observe the internal (intrament), then pause her over a cushion and lift the feet of him/her, and place the cushion on the ground; thus ensuring that the woman will not fall due to fainting (concussio).
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If the masses are not turned down and remain in the belly or on the chest of him who is wrapped up with cloth, turn them over therein and remove what has come out from it; this person will enter into a state of illness (foreboding "ill" here indicates some form of sickness).
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From childbirth upon their feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the belly rises above the feet, you must push them downward and make the abdomen small, then clasp your hands around it to tighten everything further.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When he is inside the thighs, then you command him to express himself, and make that outflow go where it should according to God'dictate.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	If it is not the time to perform an enema as recommended by water therapy, then return the fetus gradually within intervals until that second natural pause appears; at which point you will proceed with cleansing (the rectum).
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	If it is prohibited that all the fluid has been reattracted (meaning if excess fluids or humors have not yet been properly drained), then take muslin and dissolved gum, grind them in the mortar for good percussion, apply lines of this mixture to the woman' extruded matter from her body.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	When that part of it is immersed in water and achieves its proper positioning for hypochondria (the area below the breastbone where some organs are believed to reside), then:
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	When parts of it are softened (or made flexible), then apply huckberry wine and place that under pressure on the part to be treated.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	When you place it under fumigation for an hour, then lay the pain upon a cushion and apply that stretching exercise along with opening their mouths slightly, after which remove from there (presumably some treatment or remedy) to where they feel light compression in their lower abdomen. Here is the translation line by line:
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Eye examination of their bones and muscles.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the female body exhales in this manner, you engineers gradually insert your hands one by one; and she stands with her back arched on her colonne vertebrae, feet hanging downwards, those are held above their abdomen, resting upon the line of locomotion.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Here it goes line by line:
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the fetus is not out yet, take hold of their feet and lift them strongly with these movements, gradually applying pressure above the small intestines until the fetus enters its respective parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Return your hand and gently press the small belly inside gradually, commanding the woman to express herself within that hole designated as her womb/uterus.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Eye examination is traditionally performed by one of its most experienced members.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	When reduction of her mass is necessary and you cannot perform that reduction yourself, then lift the woman up and carry her to where it can be done.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If you cannot move them, place the jar on their body and forcefully press the hips together, causing strong contractions of the joints; administer the poultices that are recommended by mucolatives (substances used to promote expectoration).
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If childbirth has come upon us, then apply that poultice on the scabbard (belly), and study how to reduce swelling, forming the second natural shape of the fetus within it, and make her spasms subside while commanding her to return into herself so she may enter through the birth canal.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Eye examination of the belly expanded its masses and facies, located at the two sides of her breast.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	When the matron holds her hand on the belly and slowly turns that small thing over it becomes easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	When it is necessary for them to breatse (likely referring to patients with breathing difficulties), then they rest on the bed where we have prepared oil and muccigelates (possibly a medieval form of liniment or soothing lotion).
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Exit of the fetus prepared for the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the uterus becomes bloated according to this malady, and you inspect its second aspect within your finger (to see if it is filled with moisture), then proceed as follows:
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	If the fetus is positioned on the face and chest of it (the patient), then you insert one into the umbilicus area to ensure that it does not remain suspended or stagnate.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of twins or many young ones.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You know that bones are moved naturally, and sometimes they may twitch three or four times, which can be strange or painful sensations occurrdicted by nature itself without any specific cause within oneself; possibly due to natural causes rather than a disease of the body not caused internally.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Based on the linguistic elements and vocabul extrated from your text—which seem to combine Latin roots with Romance language characteristics, I have provided an attempt at translating this medieval medical treatise line by line into English:
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	If it is difficult for them to bear their infants and come upon us with matters of unnatural figures as they have described, then attend to these issues as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	If the maid is subtle and applies moisture that makes things easier and more refined, and timely, as per the whole figure prepared by skilled hands for healing,
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of what formed within the womb and for unborns.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some are formed in the month of May one or two, three to four, five and six, up to ten; I must verify whether a woman has had an abortion herein, another who is twelve months along causing pain through measurement by esteemed learned ones.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .lxxvi.	The text provided seems to be from an old medical manuscript or treatise with a mix of
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	When translated into English, the Latin-based line given for translation reads:
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you heal the dead fetus that has been spoken of in medical division and is not yet outside, and today you are about to use a poultice on the belly, provided it considers if the woman is healthy and not affected by misfortunes or accidents for which she may be losing her vitality.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	And when the woman is leaning on her back and her head inclines downwards while her hips are raised, it means that she is in a position of weakness or ill health according to their understanding.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister holds that hand of those who have parts or are tied in the bed, such that the flesh of the body does not extend beyond and thus facilitating its removal (presumably for surgery).
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	When necessary, moisten the mouth of the maid with honey and old goat'thy jelly and sesame seeds for dryness and excessive saliva:
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Here the midwife applies honey and ointments to their hands, places her touch on the abdomen where contractions will occur, and ensures that everything remains in its place for when the stitches are therein situated within the belly.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Where convenient in water: therefore consider if your head is prepared for it (the treatment or application), and make sure that you keep them tied with its humors here, either on their head, chest, mouth/palate, beard, breastbone, back locations proper of shoulders, or wherever else these are situated.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If there are discharges on his feet or in the groin area (or lower back), they occur between five and ten days afterward.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Return and stay in the position of care for him/her a third time if necessary, to attach his/her tongue without causing extension beyond what is naturally possible solethy.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And if it is needed throughout the entire body, that the exfoliation of him may take place in a similar manner to how pain occurs at his teeth, for true purification.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	So if the patient' extrusion has occurred from its place where it was inserted and now their body, they must be united again there so that everything is back inside as before.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the pain is in front of you and cannot be reduced by bending it over here, because a cloth wraps around that part; then take out that whole body so taken off from there, and inscribe on it where the waist or groin is located, either at the joints or in the cleft.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	When you make in this other place (possibly referring back to making adjustments or points on another part of the body, such as the chest) and both feet, it is understood that these actions are being carried out for
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	When the head of the fet is large, or if there's calcification in the skull during examination, cover and apply pressure between the teeth (possibly referring to an instrument used by barbers-surgeies) that inserts between the sharp edges and opening at the top of the head where water has been adjusted; when it touches one with this tool—which is called "alundat" for its shape, taking form from other instruments found in which skull cap belongs to him now.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English:
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the head is sick and compressed by the shoulder blade, then it has been opened inside wherein the moisture present in the chest area becomes released.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it does not become complicated and if you do not consume alcohol, then proceed with the treatment as soon as possible according to what is within your reach or ability.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If there is an outpouring of moisture from the abdomen or it drips downwards, then cut into that which contains the humidity within you.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If it is about your feet, then the attraction of you to them (meaning an irresistible pull or desire towards one's own feet) will be light and its direction toward the mouth gentle.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	May it be that you have squeezed the belly and chest with some device or tool (the one which will cover your hand), so as to allow fluid circulation within those areas where they are pressed upon by this object/tool, ensuring movement of fluids there.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	May if the other limbs are turned out and return to the head; may if the patient's mouth is open wide, insert it into the lower part of their body, and secure that around the neck with a cord tied tightly so as not to let go from there, then introduce one or two pins/needles herein (into her), drawing them in towards the head.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	If the mother'thy mouth is constricted by caramation that causes pain in her chest, do not cover it there; above all, administer treatment for excessively fatty and moist (humoral) causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If the child is on their chest, it is best if possible to use a sharp instrument (like needles): and administer that which we have mentioned for them in life.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If it is not possible, then be inserted into pads and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	When no cause from the secondary is discovered.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	When you have completed all of your treatment, then administer what we have discussed for the curative application on the punctures that were inflicted by the mother (referring to a woman' extramarital act or pregnancy).
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If you experience a flow of pus, direct it into clear and running waters, and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And you have already seen a woman in her belly, and placed that light above another womb carried by someone else, which itself is pregnant with another being inside it.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It has happened that for a long time there was an abscess on the patient'seum (abdomen), and it swelled up until its focus became evident where pains begin to emerge in various parts of the body, possibly affecting limbs or even causing severe joint pain.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And when it is called for healing of him/her, and treatment has been administered for long time(s), the child (or patient) is not cured yet.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	And now you press on him for some strong constriction bands applied tightly, and strike his bones with forceful blows daily, and another day's strikes to the other bone; he has become excessively astonishing, as if there is no bone left in the womb.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And so you consider that they are bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	So then dress the patient'immediately and extract from him stones or bones found in his intestines positioning them carefully for a long time; it is to correct this issue with small bracelets (or leeches, as they were commonly used at that time).
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the instruments that are necessary for extracting the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of turning about by which the maid is lifted:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is how they gird themselves for free movement, with two guards in the toes of each foot.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	Even though this virtue may be subtle like strangulation or a spear from the arms of men,
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Each piece of wood is two feet and a half in width at its margin, and one foot long; that' extraterritorially located place has already made for this master craftsman those adjustments on his pieces of wood which have been firmly fixed, whose lengths are one palm and four fingers, and the widths are two and a half feet or four fingers.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	These two additions are inserted into the mother'thy mouth so that she can use them when you turn over these given remedies.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another appearance of that subtle and slight putrid substance appears now:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Such pain is of bone or joint (according to) the form/shape of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	Even in the limb's extremity two additional measures are added twice, and the length of these increments is a handbreadth; the distance between them spans two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	When you wish to open the womb (uterus), then lift the woman onto a lying position so that what is between her thighs can be opened up for it.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	When you hold the tool in your mouth, as desired by the mother'thy measure of acceptance before which the physician has set it to be used for incision following the amount that I will appreciate from her approval,
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of operation in which they perform it today:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of pressure which causes him to push:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	When formication (itching caused by heat) is felt in the head where it was previously recorded as great pain,
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	Here they are assembled by means of tweezers to the extremity where it is done repeatedly and sometimes even for a long time with these tweezers, as used previously at which point was secured and measured out.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of assembly few:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of an arrow has a point:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of an arrow has points:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Shape of forceps with which your head holds this part where the neck of the fetus is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The form of a splint has two ends at which the head detaches:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two leather seats:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are used and when they multiply the spices of that thing and place them according to quantity on their bedding and among themselves for as long as necessary,
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And when you use these instruments again, there is no exemption from using them as necessary.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the second extraction (assuming 'dextricus' was a typographical error or misinterpretation
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second urine is retained by the child, you must command the caretaker to hold back their slave who retains it and perform that straining action properly with your hand on the mouth of them (and over their abdomen), and if through this means they are expelled, be glad.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	If not, then take a pebble and pierce through the cover to create a hole where you can pause that burning mouth plant; apply mustard and rue and wormwood and clove buds and powdered galena or cassia wood as well as sage.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water within the wave, and they rest upon the flame.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Return your breath through the mouth of the patient and place it inside where the phlegm accumulates in the chest.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	Return that joint has been made with such care as we have taken now, and the second servant is hurried to go get ready quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	May if this treatment is to be successful and not avoided, then command the midwife that immerses your left hand in sesame oil or millet meal paste, and inserts it into the belly button you wish for; once found therein the second (hand), insert again what has been recommended by us. Should this come with an enema attached to its string as per Mother's order, then thread that through her navel where we have instructed, withdrawing piece by piece until removed so that she cannot hold on firmly.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	From above where it is permitted at both right and left sides easily (to access or operate).
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	When adjusting its size in quantity, it will obey and avoid stickiness.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the mother'thy mouth is constricted, we have already recommended the use of wine struck by a pestle and medical herbs made from plants.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	May you not be out of place if there are causes that we recommend, watch so as not to worsen it through repetition; but even when something is ingested at the mouth and goes into a woman's hip joint (coxal region), encapsulate it with bandaging and tetrapeptide medicine. This may take several days for dissolution and removal of foreign bodies.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When the potency rises up to the head and stomach, causing inflammation of the humors within (this is when they say it has risen), then those who are administered under fumigation should be so done in a suitable manner for that purpose.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	May also from ancient times undergo fumigation with honey and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of an object by which a woman must retain her periods and second childbirth,
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Such pain is of bone or flesh.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	When the subtle limb is at rest under the chest and the large limb on the focus, with the cold effluvion being still there over the abdomen'thy parts (belly),
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And place your hand where that which is ingested has entered and repeat this process with others, holding their hands as well.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of caring for an infant'se non-pierced bellybutton (belly button without piercing). The translation takes into account a mixture of
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	 Children's bottoms are not pierced (meaning there is an absence of belly button piercings), and these areas can be delicate and sensitive as a result. The translation reflects the original text’s reference to children with unpierced navels, highlighting that this area might require gentle care due to its sensitivity or
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	 Hence the mother should pierce that belly button of hers (suggesting a parental intervention), and if not possible or she chooses otherwise, then they use an acupuncture needle instead; ensuring it does not touch the sensitive area below – likely referring to skin-tolaus. The translation captures both potential actions for addressing issues around unpierced belly buttons in children according to traditional practices while being mindful of their sensitivity, as indicated
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	 Place caution over that cloth soaked in wine and oil (implies the application of poultices, which are often heated with such substances for therapeutic use). Also provide proper care within these pads – indicating a protective or curative measure is to be taken. The translation conveys traditional remedies involving
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	 In case it is sensitive or inflamed (indicating concern for the patient's comfort), pause on that day with a catheter in place to manage fluid flow; hold off until he/she feels better – suggesting rest and medical intervention through insertion of a device like an indwelling urinary catheter. The translation reflects care considerations when dealing with potentially inflamed or sensitive areas, particularly for patients who may be bed
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	 Also an assistant cares for the patient's belly button (referring to someone helping with wound care or treatment of apendicitis). Then make sure that this healing is properly positioned, and provide its cure according to what has been discussed about treating such a condition – pointing out both surgical intervention if necessary for appendicitis ('plaga' in the historical context) as well as post-operative care using available remedies. The translation encapsulates an approach that involves not only immediate attention but also follow-up treatment, which may include wound clean
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of caring for ulcers that come about time after time.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Lumps that occur in the lower abdomen and large intestines, which arise from behind or within one of the parts,
E es una fistula o motas.	It is an opening or ulceration.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	When that ancient connection is dry and related to moisture (likely referring to the body' extraneous fluids), some measures are taken from these leaking cysts.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	Those points are protected by this water that they consume from which it suffers excretion and intoxication; some even use the spring of excretion for their suffering, others suffer due to these humors.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	From those fistulas some times wander within the bladder, and enter into the body of the ureter; they also travel through the junction of the coccyx and the navel area.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	When the fluid (or pus) in a penetrating or non-penetrating abscess enters the anus and does not come out, it is that you place your finger inside the rectum, and insert delicate threads of silk or iron into the fistula when there is no urgency.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If there is tendernthy or subtleness in that place where you feel the pressure of bone or hair within your thighs, then they enter into this slight attempt beneath what you perceive as their spot here.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you do not feel that one of them nor proceeds from any cause of obstruction or vermes (worms) and windiness, as we have said before, then understand that they are non-penetrant, and attend to your treatment accordingly.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or the hernia, it signifies that healing of this patient'dict is necessary to remove urine from there so as not to lose medical attention on its place and thus secure health recovery hereby:
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	May if something penetrates the joint of the thigh or enters into the bone and causes pain in the circuit, then this person is prone to enter here too unless they are not tortuous entering within the bone, where it will cause additional pain on departure; and such a treatment cannot be used nor consolidated with bandage.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	In all those perforating wounds there is not a cure in itself, and the treatment of these by physicians works on what has solidified within them where they have fixed their focus.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	May heal as expected according to your recommendation, and if already done so, further treatment is needed.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	It is that the hump (possibly referring to excess body mass or a swolthy abdomen) lies between your hands over his two and inclines their thighs towards his belly; place some lead/iron within those spaces, if it's in an ulcerous fistula, ensure you know the location so that when attempting treatment.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	If that which enters through the colon is introduced into your rectum now, immediately remove it from there with this tool of yours (likely referring to a medical instrument used by the doctor).
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If you feel a thrust in the body and sense it with your own hands as they are discovered by yourselves (as doctors), then understand that such is penetrating; thus, refrain from touching therein or at its location for health reasons, according to what we have discussed.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	May there also arise among those who are healthy in themselves strong ones of flesh and blood that can stand on solid ground.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	Here comes the translation:
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the attempt enters and does not penetrate up to where it is in the belly, between this and that which he hopes for flesh or bone (a hernia), then dry out the wound on the surface of the navel; when you have dried the wound inside the opening caused by the fistula, go back into the attempt with your finger to complete what has reached up to there. Through this action and as a result, it will be freed from within the hernia (fistula).
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	Return moisture to those stones clogged by the finger-sized pen, which have not been broken off due to any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	May the flow of pus sometimes occur between you and your patient's door when inside those stones, then take the instrument for cauterizing at the focus or acute medicine; such instruments adjust good habits: thus purification of those stones is achieved, and expulsion of putrid humors.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	In those treatments where stoppage and execution are involved, when the healing has been restored and there is no fear of repetition.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	May it be that the fistula has entered into the belly and is lengthened on the surface of the body; then insert your fingers therein within the belly to investigate further.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	So if there are ten pieces between you and her, they consist of flesh or meat; therefore, it is not an operation in the present but rather a matter of trust and hope for later.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The translated text line by line in English is as follows:
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	When some patients' fistulas are finished according to this method: when you insert the instrument into the fistula and it enters at the level of the abdomen, touching both the navel and the perimeter of the belly button, inserting said tool through puncture wounds on the skin, as would be done with a surgical needle according to this practice:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert into that faithful wrapping of the fields or enclose those within it, and attempt to insert your fingers into the fistula wherein continues the cure' extrication process for him/her.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	May it penetrate into the hollow of the anus properly inserted therein; and pull out its end, adjusting both ends to each other's limits, after which cleanse one day or two days later until you may see that insertion within the flesh where those extremities meet.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Return care for whatever is inside that has been solidified and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	May it be that the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then you must make it so (in whatever way possible), but only if necessary before its inception, and at such time hold your hand within to prevent any leakage; and aim for healing there.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spine is what forms the fistula; its curve is sharp and the other division is not sharp, therefore it's not necessary to insert anything unless needed sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	From the seam of hemorrhoids in which blood flows within that cavity.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	From those small and large joints that come from the same thigh bones as one of them is a hinge-like structure, which forms its motion points, and where it leaves outside - these are the limbs' ends.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	Whenever there is a lack of slight moisture in the forums below the navel, where clear water or a small drop of sanctum essence flows constantly according to the body'diction, and its hue corresponds with that of the rest of the body;
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And for that person'thy treatment, command the malady (illness) in their colon so it settles down and shows its fluids inside your bowel where they can be seen by you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Now you crush and suspend your nails above the ones that are being held by your blood tongue, placing them over those parts of yourself where they need to be struck or drilled with forceps.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	May if the points are not tightened in those due to their humidity and softness, then take for that some rough cloth or a pointed instrument or waxed linen, apply them therein with one's hands, dusting over them small ashes from the cauterization process; place these at the site of treatment according to when it was performed during cautery.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	When caring for those other cures inside which they are healed (within), ensure that this also provides care or protection while being healed within these remedies, where their own circulation is maintained by them holding
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the belly does not relent from its exit, then it is chastised with small bites in the place where crinite (likely referring to liniment or poultice) has been applied inside where body fluid accumulates and causes obstruction of evacuation when the abdomen tries to expel.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the swellings are empty in the belly (belly bloating), then their cause is humidity and dampness, and you grasp those areas with your finger or thumb moistened by oil/ointment; when pressed, they enter into that which has been said to be inside them for healing.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for those who pierce ignorantly according to this method: take firm wrapping and insert that into the needle's point, pressing down each swelling onto these parts above it with said needle; enclose their extremities outside of the thread around the part where you inserted the needle quickly. Then straighten out what was injured at first place by piercing, covering again with firm wrapping and inserting that into another nearby pointed end (of the same or different material), thrusting away from oneself longitudinally; now mend it fully using this method of repair:
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	When all is done, and only one of those things remains not used up, then the excess fluid in the heart will flow from that particular thing.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place your hand over the belly, roasted or in a chestnut, and put it on top of her colon while commanding the malady to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Return that which is within the box when it has expired its time, and take care of those contained within it for healing purposes.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of care for ulcers (or more accurately "ulceration," as this term typically refers
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	 The statement appears to be in a constructed or fictional language, possibly with elements similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French as hinted by you. Without knowledge of this specific linguistic system (as it's not standard), I can only attempt an educated
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	 Translating this into English with the understanding that some terms may still be unclear due to their constructed nature:
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	When you hold those hot poultices vigorously that entered early and have caused scrapes, take care to keep them until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of healing with honey, it is effective.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Be aware that this is not perfect translation due to the complexity of historical and regional languages which can have significant differences in structure and vocabulзу from modern ones:
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And when the fluid that has entered is located in the joint space or within ligaments and tendons, and it needs to be removed from its source (the knee), then take care of it carefully.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	If you wish, then burn the second one that came before in his/her chest.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	May small ulcers hard and roundish appear on the surface of the body, and these often come upon children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	Care for him that stretdicts and inserts it therein which you have just newly put in place; be faithful or hold the one within the box as such.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	If you wish, then burn it here (at this place), as we have said earlier in our discussion of fire and urgent medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And it is already eliminated from inwards and outwards with this very same tool that you will direct.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	May small or tortuous worms appear on the surface of the body inside the patient, and when they are crushed therein, it causes pain throughout the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	Care for the patient involves using a catheter made of penis bone or screw pinch, which is strong and placed above where it holds within the circle formed by the parts associated with the catheter; your hand turns around inside the tube to insert what'dict in its circuit within the body formulation, stopping at the spot on flesh that has been shaved.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, use a bronze or iron needle according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Here is the line by line translation:
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	If you wish to cauterize the insect as described in the procedure of artery cautery here, then:
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	From the instruments we use to administer poultices/ointments.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some times it is pusht with silver or lead, or malleated tin, and sometimes with small and large instruments that are used for the treatment of children; and what is administered in the care of babies is a smaller one, and from those whose heads are bald or suffering from delusion, their crusts are little ones.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of corrosive acid is large and few in number:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the tube below where it is bound by the bag, and to this place does the bag attach itself according to custom here; at that point, how many times has the bag been attached there?
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	E the extremity of it is loose (hence not covered), as a leopard at heel; and in one side there are two disorders, on the other aspect also a defect, with its extent determined by coarseness, plus an additional small size has been added.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And if it is a bag in which the potions of the bladder of beast or sheep'dictare are paused and its handle is a palm, then this refers to an herbarium (a collection of dried plants used for study) container that doctors use. Here 'vesica de bestia' likely means phlebotomy jar/container where blood was drawn from animals in medieval times,
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And if it is pierced by jolts of motion as you turn, and the space between these large stones (referring to bones) that holds this object, then describe a situation where movement or turning could potentially damage an instrument inserted into those spaces. Here 'motz' can be interpreted loosely as forceful motions causing distress ('ayssi') in relation with rotating movements and
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And if you insert it into those stone joints of great strength between the fields (referring potentially to bone and ligament structures), or place them there, adjust that bag on your body; when paused in this position inside where potions are contained within a leather pouch ('borsa'), make sure:
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Return the hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over it so that no intestine comes out from there: take care of such by applying olive oil or albumen (egg white) mixed with mucilage (flaxseed gelatin), facilitating removal. Afterward lift up the hernia above their legs; apply what has been done outside, and use your minister to blow bubbles into it so that whatever remains is quickly expelled from within its cavity: then remove everything out of there together with the cushions underneath them.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If medicine forces it out, take as much of it as possible; and if one sleeps all night with it in them, they may be revived by dawn.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	May you plaster that in the abdominal humors and blood flow of his belly'dicts to iterate (repeat or apply) the caustic inside until healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If in the belly there are bloody or worming excretions, then it is necessary for the cups (likely metal instruments used by medieval physicians) to be subtil and leon-like among which those that children use as criteria lie.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of disease treatment or healing of diseases.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And in the division of treatment for these diseases that were necessary to free the body, you tell thus: the cure for those humors and remedies according to their complementarity.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it is said that the pains are varied according to where they occur and how they manifest as pains.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	The causes of motion are joint pain caused by drops (of fluid), or laceration in the thigh bone, percussion on it or due to a sword, axe, scythe, or resembling these objects causing such pains.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	May the illnesses present in the body' extran locations also appear on the head, or neck (the crown), or chest, abdomen, back, and limbs, resembling those within the members themselves.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And when one recommends some treatments for that reasoning and rules concerning other diseases, here it comes:
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	When one commences with simple humors (bodily fluids), but the recall of complex ones will arrive at their third feasting place for consumption,
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Thus say when you have a simple fever without fracture and there is great swelling on that part with apendicitis abscess presenting itself cauterized, then apply pressure to the head (cephalically), do not delay too long; extract it according to the quantity of its viscus if no prohibition against bleeding during surgery exists, mostly when this organ is sick and little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And if it is a beating of the contrary parts, and protection for his bowels and food intake (especially heavy dishes), then take care to protect them all.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	May if from mildness you refrain any cause, then the pain will be lessened and not approach meat or food.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	When pressure is applied over the bedridden patient with an open wound treated by caustics (burning substances), apply it either on the linen where they lie or in water for cleaning, holding their hands firmly during this process.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	May it be certain that the cautery is securely in place, if you are sure of its position on the grounding material recently applied and where the air has not changed this covering which they recommend for small application.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	If the air has changed and become cold, then rest your hand inside an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the child is large or due to insufficient space and illusion of form, and their lips are not properly adjusted for speech, then fix those with stitching as recommended by them (doctors).
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	May it be discovered that the child has broken their bones and not restrained them but with a small suspenderer; then attend to that very thing immediately with medicine and restore flesh back into its proper place in the joint area, commanding the malady (the sickness) to consume foods of which there is an affinity: cabbage heads and form-like things similar to those they eat, until it becomes consumed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	If there is corruption in the navel and it does not stick to the bone, then you will cut off all this putrefied substance and remove its fluid, with care for that which has been removed.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these diseases the artery or vein through which blood flows is not detached by medicine, then seek out that vessel and if you have cut it (not removed), make an incision there with a sponge or ligature (tie); and if necessary to provoke what we've said so far doesn't cause discomfort, perform cauterization where the blood has been stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is feverishness; so that you should powder over those places until this dust solidifies when the air changes.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	When any one makes an incision alone without being in current sesps and sanctus driga (suggesting that certain conditions require not just medication but also the presence of specific herbs or substances like frankincense), it may be harmful to do so.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And now this operation on the large wounds is performed when it is deemed necessary and they are stitched together, where these same wounds have not been affected by air which has not changed them yet.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	If the air has been altered, and especially in summer time, one does not understand their position for this powder, therefore take care of those that we have mentioned before, so you rest upon these hot preparations (or pause on bread dipped in flour mixed with water and honey), taking heed to prevent the intestine from protruding; furthermore, pay attention to them while they are being cured.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If you wish to correct a bone fracture in the body and it is small (petite), then extract water from movement or action.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	When directing the treatment of skull fractures that are infected,
De las plaguas del col.	From the fluids of the colon (or from the inflammation/swelling in the colon
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	When flies cause acidity within the colon, there is no difference in treatment; between fever and a headache (translation assumes contextual understanding of medieval medical language), both are simple to address. Here 'plaga' refers generically to an infestation or illness caused by pests like flies which could be associated with waste products from the colon, indicating poor hygiene conditions
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerves of the colon are involved or if it'se an artery issue (translation assumes contextual understanding that neurological and circulatory components may be implicated), then these conditions require active care with water meant to cause strong stoppage, administered similar to tonics used for wounds—to protect against the nerves and compress the affected area. Here 'nervi' refers specifically to both neural structures associated with sensation as well possibly an arterial problem within or affecting the colon; medieval medicine might not have made such distin0ns clear in every instance, using terms like "nurses" metaphorically for treatment and applying pressure remedies akin to wound dressings. This suggests that differentiation between neurologic involvement (nerves) versus circulatory issues is recognized as necessary but may not always be thoroughly
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	No flies cause total madness; the substance of nerves is fire and constant presence in it burns out all limbs (or parts), which puts itself into every part—implying that an imbalance or excessive inflammation related to nervous activity can lead to symptoms throughout one's body. Here 'madraste' refers metaphorically, using the idea of heat and fire commonly associated with nerve-related ailments in historical medical theory; this term might be understood as fe
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	If the water is for healing with medicinal herbs or oil-soaked cloths and warmth as per this methodology after washing with water, apply some poultice on moistened linen soaked in olive (or non-olive) oil, and heat stones when bathing with water and other mineral stones according to this practice, and anoint rheumatic joints.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the child is large, apply stitching or clamp their lips together, and take care that it be healed inside where they are until cured.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If there is depth or pain in the lower part of the body that has been operated on, then pierce through it at this location with a surgical instrument such as trephine (permeating).
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If in the patient there is an inserted artery and a flow of blood has been obtained from it, then separate or dry out that one if necessary; otherwise, cauterize it as required to induce diuresis (fluid expulsion).
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	May you have already secured the vertebrae of the spondylosis or all, and saved the veins in the neck; after that adjust your lips on the crest over the sacrum without touching it; beyond this point reduce them to their natural shape, strengthen them through straightening exerthyze, leave such care for a few days until healing occurs.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	May if the child already experiences pain in their bones, then you will strike that area; and if there are fragments of bone within them, extract all those as you can from them; but if it is not possible for you to remove them, allow what remains inside so that the child may detoxify itself.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	If the patient is recently born then grind over that powder which has been recommended for you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If in the patient there is an opening (fistula), then heal that part with the water from which memory will come back to it within its own chamber/head.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	When a cold or resembling disease occurs between the shoulders and it feels in space (or abdomen) below, above, on top of, or among them:
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a pulsation of the lance or couch, and sometimes you measure its depth, then consider also that if there's wind infection within (the lungs), as this implies sickness; understand therefore that airbordict are mortals.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	If there is no depth and the purge has recently occurred in it (the womb), then you pause for the first hour after birth, without straining to prevent the sanctum from remaining deep within the womb and returning to the chest, which may alleviate that discharge throughout the day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	If the ointment is not at your disposal, then rest in the water of little creatures caught for that which sucks up the humidities; and make sure gout (the patient' extrémité) sleeps on top so as to let flowing fluid circulate within it.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	May you have passed through the plaza for three days or more without experiencing spasm in the malady, nor fever of ill heart and tightness around it; then take other beneficial measures provided by him/her (the patient), as when the body is saved, attend to its calming needs and care for all necessary healings.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	May it be that the healing of Lu is postponed, and even then locked up tightly until now, you will know that a fistula has formed; take care of this accordingly with your wisdom as judge.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	If the swelling is from a fissure of space or wound and it's simple on the skin of the thigh or back, then heal that with the fluid applied after stitching if great, or powder if small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	May there be pain in the bone and already open teeth that have been set apart for extraction by forceps if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then let them be released that the vermin may escape from them (i.c., to prevent pests like insects or small animals trapped inside).
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	From other sudden illnesses in other body parts, treatment is the fluid that we have mentioned before.
De las plaguas del ventre.	From abdominal troubles or disorders/affairs of the stomach (or possibly "stom
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The condition which causes you pain in your abdomen is either great or small, or it moves around/comes and goes (based on the context of medieval medical texts where "moves" could indicate a fluctsion). In English: The nature of the discomfort that
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	The great discomfort sometimes compresses the nerve or entrails within (the abdomen), for which it is felt that there has been an invasion of them and a violent/subtle constriction, indicating pain due to pressure on internal structures like organs or vessels. In English: When something significant causes this discomfort in your belly, it may press upon the nerves or intestines within, suggesting they have possibly become trapped (constricted) and are experiencing a forceful/
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	This slight disturbance is difficult to manage without your intervention; if the invaders (pathogens or other irritants) do not leave their current location, then both belly and chest will become constricted due to inflammation caused by them, making it hard for you. In English: This minor disruption requires careful attention from someone else—without removing these intruders quickly enough so they don't spread further into your body (especially causing additional issues), both the abdomen and chest will become difficult due to inflammation resulting from their presence, complicating matters.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore the worse disturbance is one that moves around (indicating a more transient or unpredictable condition), and even then removing it can be challenging when dealing with specialized areas mentioned in this context, which could refer to parts of the body like those affected by gout as previously discussed. In English: Consequently, if you have an ever-changing disturbance within your abdomen—moving here and there rather than being stationary—it can
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	You understand that the surgery of the belly is divided into four parts, and if necessary, you may perform stitches which are common to those required for other diseases on the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	When two other stitches communicate with each other or themselves in the abdominal stitch, it may be both more and less beneficial for them to do so.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And you are recommended each of any exposition or declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So it's said that when the patient is small and suffers from a cause of the intestine for which (it becomes) difficult to reduce (the swolthy condition), either because of diminutiveness at onset or due to inflation brought about by cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when the fluid comes in, immediately (at once) as you cut that which is submerged under a moist cloth alone or squirming (in water), and ginger, pepper, spices, etc., all of this goes into the cavity where inflammation resolves.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	When joint pain occurs after some treatments in which water has been used, it is better than the effect of water alone for relieving inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	So when the inflammation is resolved, then you moisten the intestine in the cavity where it has been elevated with wine and vinegar; this allows for gentle stimulation of its interior caused by a small reason.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If there is an escape of the matter from him for this treatment, then divide the rupture with a small instrument to which pins have been fixed (intramedically).
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The initial line of text translates into English as follows:
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	From the tool, its form is thus:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One sharp slice of stone (perhaps referring to an acute needle or tool), and the other not sharp, along with a subtle part that is neither here nor there in terms of fineness—neither lacks precision like the soft spine does; both are blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the vermin is increased and comes out of the intestine, it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form in its own place if possible over there, better than anywhere else, this should be done.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is wide and it occurs in the lower abdomen (the belly's bottom), make sure to spread out the hernia over there, placing cushions under their two legs; if it lies above the stomach area, then place a cushion on top of their head as well.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	When the disturbance is in one of the parts of the belly, then halt your understanding and consideration immediately for that portion wherein lies the seed (implying an unborn child), so that it remains safe while addressing the other part.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	Whenever you wish to address these large and draining pus, here is what should be done:
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	In small pains, pause what you have prepared for use, and make sure that the minister (likely an assistant or another practitioner) is between your most affected parts; this tongue holds all disruption at its place in their mouths while adjusting lips as needed due to any cause previously sewn together.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	When fine needles travel between thickness and subtlety, the small ones move languor within the flesh; large thus find it difficult to enter through the belly, hence they seek passage in delicacy and girth.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And where the needle is not fixed in one of the patient'thy extremities provided for, so that the flesh does not separate and becomes loose before its solidification.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	Not for extended stitching so that flesh is not prevented from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	Here comes the text in English line by line:
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These surgical needles are placed in a manner conducive to the small wounds, and for their stitching all that is needed is an awl or thread of similar material.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	May the second stitch be considered common: and you gently apply a needle to the four extremities (hands/feet), from the cranium downwards, using an agile yet substantial touch with the needle threaded through it.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	When the needle is inserted into these four limbs (hands and feet), reduce the needle of that particular surgeon' extricated part, ensuring that the pus-filled cavity goes down to the ground layer by layer through this stitched cloth strip you are handling, so that suture follows another in a strong fabric.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	When there is a pause between any one of the stitches in that body part (the meaning likely refers to an area where surgical work has been done), measure out the thickness of the flesh therein.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This suture tells us about men'thy health or condition. The medieval doctor is instructed by this observation to pay
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	Here comes a sentence from the medical treatise to translate:  
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And after fifteen days or so, the plague is consolidated in these spaces, and it heals this one here, applying moisture for motion' extrinsic factors (the humors within), and they are cured over time through their arrangements/procedures.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	E the other physicians had not healed; and by miracle focus (likely referring to focused energy or light), they did not cure that which was enchained there, where neither tonic nor medicine could enter, but sometimes placed their hands for two visits a day over the soil covered with dew, continuously bathing them in honeyed water from melting snow.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	May you direct two kinds of sewing according to what has been narrated by Paracelsus.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	When you begin with stitching of the chest and insert an awl needle from one side to another, it means:
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	So when the needle enters into the navel and in that very region of flesh, you also insert it down to all parts of the body, leaving no space untouched; and let the other end of the thread from where we cut continue through both ends of this extremity which has been touched by our entry.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	When you have pain in that area, then make another passage of the same kind between those two parts of the body I mentioned earlier; and let the entrance to this hernia be here within these walls, and insert the needle into the other extremity of the part I described.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	When the essence permeates that which it enters into, within the cistern at the extreme end of its location where all has entered in herein,
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Here begins from this side of the patient'dictum, and with that one we apply to its extremity which is in the other direction herein, applying it there as well along with where it exits; and extracting that very same needle out of the cushion.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And there is another remedy and other such as you use, making an application for each part that has been opened according to what seems appropriate hereinabove mentioned (as previously explained).
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The sum of this suture technique is that you sew the skin with which you sew hairs together, ensuring stitching along the extremity part of the thigh, leaving it open until completion.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	May the second kind of stitching that Dwain provides is its own speech and recommendation for it to be done by him, so that all parts are added together in his patient'dict partition as per nature; apply another part from himself and match each other extremity with one another, according to what he recommends.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Where you hold the needle at the end of your hand nearest to where it was inserted, and push that into one part of the cyst, then turn the needle over so as its point faces another part of the cyst through two fingers; here we rotate the needle and make that penetration in two parts of the cyst.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This stitching is better than ordinary sewing and it's for which the following memory returns to mind.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Guiliel or William (since "Guiliel" could refer either to Guillaume
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And so too may the dissertation involve two needles stitching together the belly's seam, and when you insert your fingers into these spaces where an awl (a pointed tool for piercing or making holes) is required by thee to begin inserting its own point. It then penetrates through those same sutures of which are fastened around their chests tightly bound together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	When a disturbance occurs in the belly'dictum (abdomen), it is understood that its stitching becomes difficult compared to other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	May the treatment of medicine for infants be a remedy for other diseases as well.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is when you continue the treatment of recent excrement in their sanctified space due to altered air, and return the intestine and hernia properly positioning them so that they rest on this corporeal soil.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	If the air has altered the humors and they have become thick and sluggish, then on that spot where you are currently inside to drain them with hard pebbles or clogs in their fields (limbs), solidify these clots/pus and watch; also ensure this treatment for such imbalances as is necessary for other illnesses.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	May you not have the medicines with you at this moment; place them where they are now for a day or two until I return, as long as you learn from me how to use them when pains come upon simple disorders like gout.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	May you fear that the vermin will communicate with injuries in the main body parts; therefore, submerge wool in warm or scalding oil (or water), and pause it within the circulation areas between joints and limbs' sinews to prevent them from spreading.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	If there is pain or putrefaction in your intestines, they often worsen over time; and if the obstruction has reached the cavity of it, that part becomes inflamed sharply at once, especially if the blockage has entered into the cavity itself.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	Be aware that this one, which is of a gross healing nature from the intestine, is different from what happens in the small intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult for the intestine that has been called "gout" to receive healing from outside forces because of:
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	May it be that what proceeds from the soil is the fabric (i.m., refined material), and so you can obtain this recently made one; through your skilled hands, reduce those bulges immediately where they are reduced in place.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	May it pass through and have been blackened or reddened therein; when that faithful hand presses on the spot where it has darkened, to make sure that the blood flows smoothly in the veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remember when you felt illness in the intestine (budel).
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small enough to be returned inside with cold water jets (percussion of a lance), then you may restore that which was lodged within your abdomen, being an old parasite from the seventh part of the stomach, a fistula formation, causing distress in its management and motion.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	And when the treatment of him has not yet been confirmed in his recovery, it may cease subtly and that which focuses on healing will solidify wherein is located health.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Return another portion of the body back into its cavity and do not cease making forms for other parts according to the amount remaining in the entire patient.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Reduce that and the contents within it inside the bowel, and remove those accessories attached to it so that the bowel is healed; do not harm anyone' extramural spaces (outside of the body cavity).
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine has been pierced by a sharp object from within which belongs to the patient's body (or possibly an animal), and you take hold of this extremity; cover it with fine leather, and wrap another piece of such material around its part in contact with your hand. Also secure this striped linen firmly among all points where needles are inserted into that intestine to prevent further rupture or displacement (breakage).
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This mending technique is only a second method of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	May it be if the child is large and wide, mostly when in one of the small intestines, then not an issue but a delicate matter that cannot heal entirely from there on out.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of treating haemorrhoids and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Understand that when all younglings and lameness occur as they wither away, and ulcers appear without being healed or the armor not detaching entirely for time immemorially, in any part thereof universally it is known as a fistula; this we call out to you.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	E fistula according to truth is a tightly woven, hard, white fabric of which there is no pain and in which it aches like the torture of execution; therefore they call that dull agony "sharp pain", i.dict (meaning sharp or piercing). Here's what this line by line translation would look like:
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	It is moist in water, and thus quickly loses its humidity within some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Some moisture is moved here, and it's scant, thick, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	E yeu ja he denant dit in the division, which when you have diagnosed the diseases (which all ulcers that are not cured nor arise without meat remain is due to one of these causes): among them: because spleen weakness occurs within the body; or by malicious intentions towards oneself; or where natural teeth prevent the birthplace for flesh, meaning its own cavity cannot house new growth. Or it's medicine that proves convenient in healing him/her (referring to a person); when corruption appears there and pestilence occurs – especially at Saragossa, which is notorious for difficult digestion of diseases with delayed recovery due to nature; or wherein the body itself an illness such as feverish sickness exists.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And have shown all those causes and their symptoms are within the realm of medicine in division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	When you know the treatment for the abscess which is caused through operation, it follows that...
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore, this one among these ulcers that are according to the present illness is from difficult cures and lack of knowledge, which requires effort on our part for its treatment.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If there is any depth in the fistula that does not reach these places mentioned herein and you hope for healing from it, and wish to gain knowledge of it again, then take mercury or iron, and if the fistula has been straightened out afterwards, ask this person about its course.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	May it be that if the fistula is twisted, then investigate with a subtle hammer; for when this heavy metal (hammer) lifts up and curves due to the twisting of your body part, you will find the cause.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	If there is an excruciating ulcer present, it is not within your power to try upon it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Now apply the poultice over his body with these ointments; for the moisture through which you wash him will be absorbed by those other ointments and carried away from there.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	When you have stood over all these causes and seen them clearly, then go to the treatment according to your confidence: for it may be that which appears as an adjacent fistula or in place of connection, near joint or distant from it, within nerve, artery, vein, or one of those places where it is located.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Then dry up the fistula as directed by its nature and remove what is present in that filtration, and whatever has arisen within the flesh or on bone fragments and shadows of figures, heal it while inside.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is deep and secondarily dilated, then cover it as much as possible within your reach, and purify that part in all of its corruptible bones; apply wrapped medicinal poultices around them, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have comprehended to be iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And when medicine acts quickly, it dissolves some of the humors that are infiltrating the cavity of the fistula caused by decay.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Return that which is needed for it in its cavity until healed within where healthy flesh resides.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	May it not be healed by water alone, then apply that treatment secondarily which we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	May it be that the cause of fistula is blood and bone tissue which you must certify; then inquire about that moisture according to what we have recommended, provided you do not forbid any potential causes of veins or nerves from their primary seat.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	May if the bone is discovered and there' extrinsic disruption or blackness, then treat that area wherein those dysfunctions reside completely; pay careful attention to this body fluid within which it embodies ill health so as to heal entirely.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	If the patient is not healed and their flesh has become diseased in its way of being made (probably referring to improper nourishment or care), then you will understand that you have not reached the total cure for corruption; consequently, immediately examine above them with great attention and refinement, restoring what is needed there.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it heals, eat; but if not, then understand that the corruption is in the deep recesses of the body, which has not been achieved yet, and thus you must continue to seek a cure for that.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the bone is rotten or can be pulled out (of course), then pull it out with delicate forceps as required.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If you have a stone in the bones, very carefully extract all of them therein without leaving any cause for your strength to fail.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	May there be any cause of dampness that brings opposition herein without fear or mistake; then examine those ligaments and bones in this place, and disarticulate the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you are not prepared with the bones of your hour (chest), then place it on the ground where water will moisten that part and keep it from consolidating, ensuring to encircle what was cut out during surgery as needed for reconstruction or healing.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having feared the submersed couch beneath or above the oil (above), and in vessels made of linen or other fabrics used for oils ("pottery"), when they stretch those bands/ligaments, their bones become separated from each other; it is then that these things are removed.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	May it be that there is a great stone with the bones of change or similar objects to those herein present, and as soon as from this place you have removed said object (implying removal of an obstruction such as kidney stones), only for so long does its face remain damaged; thus after allowing enough time for retreating that damage and corruption are withdrathy held within it, restore the health.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	May it be that the decay from within has taken a great part and already reached the bone marrow; therefore, when this damage is necessary to close (the wound/lesion), one must insert both ends of said lesion completely into its location wherein corruption arrived, so as for healing what was inserted there.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And you should recommend that water be brought to the patient'thy thighs so as to ease and assist in your work.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A healthy young man of approximately xxx years old experiences pain in his thighs, and from the disintegrated parts thereof enters into the legs materially brought by external causes; it is great absorption that constitutes its essence.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And now the time has extended for that error within which doctors have caused it to be mistaken and with materials moving in motion, its healing focus is appropriately paused until when a fistula-focused cautery channel will form, wherein all things previously brought together there are put under operation.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And after many years of treatment by doctors and not in their own fluids but rather within the arts (medicine), they are called back for care.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And now there is a cushion under them, and the materials that flow through it are coming out here from him; his skin tone was also completely yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then insert the attempt into one of those instruments, and make sure that the attempt reaches the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Return and examine quickly those instruments and tools, bringing them over all parts of the change (belly).
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And now you have cut the patient's thigh and incised over one of those bones, where I found it corrupted (rotten), crumbled into dust, discolored; already there was also rot in part of the cambium within which had penetrated.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	When it is necessary for me to obtain what I previously discovered and prepared from bone,
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And if it has not been in the bone but that which had broken and was bound up already, you have made an incision or cut. (Here "cujegui" likely means "made," "abscidigui e serregui" refers to a fracture having occurred and being set ("bound"), and "derraziguada" indicates that the wound has been cleaned
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And you have stopped the restoration of the flesh with medical reconstruction for long periods, and it has not been fully restored or healed yet. (Here "pausegui" likely means to stop continuing an action like treatment, while "consolidatorio medici" refers to a form of thera
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And you have continued studying and uncovering matters about the bones after discoveries were made initially, yet there continues to be harm or deterioration in the bone structure. (Here "iteregu" means 'have been investigating' repeatedly over time; “descubre” indicates discovery of something new related to a previous finding concerning bones; and "atrobi continua corrupció am le os
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	You have been binding what appears to be the harmful condition; and you now offer fair treatment for healing and restoration of that part which has not yet been restored or fully recovered from this injury/condition. (Here "sergue" likely means 'have bound' using a dressing, bandage etc.; “feyre curacio” refers to the proposed medical intervention; ‘restauracio’ denotes healing restoration of an injured body
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And you have discovered the other patient is also bedridden and as such incrementally fixated (treating) each bone individually; not having fully restored that person until after all treatment was completed within a month's time, extracting what remained in their spine for medicinal purposes to restore it. Here "adonc" indicates the continuation of an action or discussion ('and'); “descubri” means 'have discovered'; fixing each bone individually implies careful attention and specific treatments directed at individual skeletal components; restoring within a month suggests that after treatment, there is believed improvement in their condition. The extraction for medicinal purposes may refer to removing damaged or diseased material (possibly the patient'thy spine) which would then be treated ('restore') using specific remedies as recognized by medicine at this time ("medicinas"), leading presumably back to health and stability, suggested here with "consolidat
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	No iteration is necessary in the operation of Lu and Seccio Lu; what' extraneous must be removed due to the fluidity disposition of Lu's humors, as well as their tolerance and fear of death – for Lu will undergo evacuation throughout all hours because of superfluous sputtering.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	So heals it in its entirety, and nothing is left of the hard bone matter; good fortune lies in his disposition within his body, which returns to normal function; conversations occur among these dispositions without causing disruption during walking or harm from any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	May if the limb is protruding in such manner that you have applied pressure on it: then take hold of that with a strong lariat, and command your attendant to extend it outwards; pull apart the thicknesses (or layers) of this first lariat from the one previously used; place that over the flesh wherein lies the protruding part, stretching its skin beyond what you wish for surgical division. Here is the translation line by line:
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	When you press or lift with a staff or tabletop (after performing the action), when it is not forbidden for the scalpel that does not corrupt flesh, do so carefully to prevent damaging healthy tissue.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Whenever the screw is placed on the damaged spot little by little, if it appears in the cavity of decay and not immediately visible upon feeling, then other similar devices are used for its treatment.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bones are decayed and not prominent, it is one continuous division, and rot occurs at this site or in another place; then pause briefly, and hold that piece of first-cutting from where corruption extends continuously into the second cutting.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	Whenever surgery is performed at the site of decay as previously mentioned, it means that a small incision will be made according to where the deterioration has occurred.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If the decay is in the joint, cut out that decayed joint and continue cutting with your hand from there.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	If decay is in the continuous flow of joints, it is not by chance but due to cause.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If the corruption is in the chest or the breast, it'dict; but if you seek to discover how this corruption appears on your part and then remove that, following any possible manner by which it can be done according to what is within your power, therein corrects itself for thee when not contrary to thy veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	You understand which instruments are used for placing these bones and how they prepare them in terms of size, hardness/softness, subtlety or bulkiness (and their rarity), so that you can choose the appropriate tools suitable for this specific operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	You understand that this operation concerns the specific tool with which you operate; when it is great and long-standing expertise in these instruments, as well as witnesses of maneuvers for illnesses, then you already possess what is necessary according to your tools for all diseases.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And so you form in this chamber of our capital, the number of tools that will be used for your simple procedure which you shall experience here.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw: (This line seems self-explanatory in English;
Forma de autra serra:	Shape/form of other cautery: (In this context, "autra" likely means
Forma de autra serra:	Form or shape of another saw instrument: This line translates to the description in English of a different
Forma de autra serra gran:	Shape/form of other cautery (possibly large): Here, "gran" suggests that there
Forma de ray:	Form or shape of the instrument used for puncturing (likely a
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	They are shaped like the head of a star and their points resemble those on an awl (a small pointed tool). This translation assumes that "ray" refers to some form of puncturing or cauterizing instrument, similar in shape mentioned earlier with regards to tools used for medical procedures at the time. The descriptions given are likely from historical texts where specific instruments had standardized shapes and sizes described
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	They are not supposed to be confined but rather should have their heads scraped when corrupted (possibly indicating a need for cleaning or preparation), or it is broad-mouthed here referring possibly to another medical tool with an opening wide enough, likely used in the same context as instruments that interact directly at joints. This line suggests maintenance and hygiene practices of these tools during their
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape/form of other saw (potentially large): The translation interprets this to mean a larger version or
Forma de razori menor:	Form shape of the smaller cautery mentioned before. Here, "razor" likely
Forma de razori lat:	Shape/form of saw (possibly older style): This line suggests a specific type or
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Shape/form of other saw (possibly different in design) is here described as having a part made from wood and metal for cutting that can come out due to its use or quality ("puciósobira"), with the sharpness provided by iron, suggesting an emphasis on durability. The patient's arm-guard appears also designed specifically into their construction – possibly indicating customization based on individual needs: "and his arms are guarded/protected by metal guards." This translation interprets these historical medical
Forma de lu:	Shape of him/her (The term "forma
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	 The shape in which it has a concave form.
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of alternate shaving instrument:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	The form of other instruments for curved limb:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of small pincers appearing as an attempt:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	The shape of instruments with which bones are placed:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of alternate smaller instruments:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another instrument; this resembles a saw blade, and the end of it is cut, which is displayed in joint spaces within bone regions.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The form of pain that corresponds to the depth at which bones are pierced:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its part is a sharply pointed end or extreme point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is iron from India, and somewhat similar in nature as all the causes that have been mentioned regarding rashes and cuts and scrapes.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	From joints and bone openings.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are swolthy or due to internal/external causes, and when treating that corruption with these medicines does not relieve discomfort, sometimes the disease progresses in a limb without being struck by any cause; therefore, insert this limb into water (the bath) so that humidity escapes it from death or malice since moisture is worse for decay than external forces.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And as for that person you are punishing, their limb is black inside because it has been lanced where the flame burnt them, or they may have turned into blackness within there after being operated on by such a one here who pricks all over your body; therefore be aware of this.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	If it is caused by the rupture of some poisonous causes, like from sea serpents (scorpions), worms (worms), leeches or other creatures and beings, then so too with these sources we deal accordingly.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the decay or rupture is in the affected limb'seat (extremity), then you inspect and do not give space for the rot to enter into its cavity, where it can reside.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	When you access the main cavity, then insert that of the flame into the body' extramural region where phlegm accumulates in the chest area due to breathing through it (likely referring to practices like cupping or using a heated cup), and do not provide space for corruption within.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	If that occurs within your arm in between the joints (within the elbow), then you should insert it into the crook of the elbow at the junction.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	If another passage of decay occurs and I send the leg out again, then in that case it is the death of the malady; administering a different cause for cure depends on virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	When a part of the foot appears sickly and deteriorated, then insert it into one of your beans (possibly referring to inserting something edible or medicinal).
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If you climb up a slope of the foot, then cut through it entirely on the foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	May you enter into the abdomen (belly), then cut through the cushion within the joint of the belly.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If rot has already affected the skin, it is not an entrapment but expulsion herein, and let out the humour (disease). Thus, delivering death for the malady.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	When inserting or sawing the limb, you tighten one bandage on the part where it will be inserted/sawed, and another bandage over the area; extend both minister's bandages to the parts in question; separate the flesh that is between two such bands at points within which a sponge has been hidden (presumably for padding or support), then insert or saw this part.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	When cloth is placed over all parts of the body so that it does not touch the affected area and draws out the adjusted injury and applied ostentation (cauterization),
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If you cool the flow of blood when working on it, then apply cautery to that area immediately, or place some grains therewith restraining further bleeding; and return your attention (to treatment) before things are fully resolved/completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Return its injured limb back onto the joint and care for it so that healing occurs within therein.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And advise him to bring water into his home for the foot injury he has had, which was caused by cold leading to hardening in his foot where it accumulated due to fire exposure.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And when that decay has occurred within its dwelling place in the body as a whole, attend carefully to treat all of it on the skin (the entirety of the limb).
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that home prepares for the patient to go into their body where they suffer from pain and dryness, insert that finger inside the joint, and heal begins therein.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Once there has occurred that same doctor's malady in this matter.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And so I am permeated with the excess water that rests on top of my medicinal substance, and it does not cause further overflow into another part within; no more is there a surplus or outflow to other places beyond this medium.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And when the patient regains consciousness and comes back to me, that same man has prepared everything for them completely, and they are healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	This sentence does not have been used for mere embellishment but serves as an aid in dealing with what this illness causes and is meant to symbolize or indicate that which it signifies, according to how it operates.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of care for the belly and quality of enemas with medicine.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When abscess forms in the flesh of the arms and its space is prolonged while collecting disease, it will be cut off and pierced through to drain out sickness; place a linen cloth under where it was drained from (like a woollen blanket), another servant on their legs, and one on top of them holding hands. No fistula has formed here as blood vessels or nerves/ligaments have not been compromised; instead, the fluid is sucked in without reaching further into bone marrow or brain—simply using a sinew (a type of tendon).
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Even if spaces are extended within where infection spreads to any part of the body, it is then called a fistula and cannot be cured there.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The cure of the patient is that you insert their entire bowel all at once while revolving it (carefully maneuvering), mainly when it feels like a cloth and does not stick to its location due to decay.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	May you hope that the bowels will stick and that such deterioration has not occurred through any previous action, if there is a face-toclick in the bowels, then attend to it with enema care.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E es que consideras al sinu," and if it is great, then use of breath that smells like fetus oil occurs; this medicine from Egypt which consists of oil, wine, and honey takes its parts within a vessel, where they are mixed together until liquefied in the place to be applied with which the medication will enter into (or penetrate) and reach the affected spot.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And extract that which has entered, and allow it for so many days until the belly is cleansed and purity returns to the body'dictation appears akin to an amalgam of languages with roots in Latin medical tradition such as Italian (due to words like "membro," meaning member), Spanish ("costuma" – custom or typical practice, though more commonly found in modern Spanish than classical texts), French
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And some enemas are administered with ash water when not present this particular remedy, and you take cinder (ash), placing it in the water; then add that much of the ashes into what goes inside while confirming your bowels have opened so they can be cleansed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the humid cannot tolerate Egyptian medicinal or ashes' water, then cleanse that with water and honey mixed three times over, also apply vinegar and honey mixture on it; for the property of honey is to purify and wash away. In addition, when applied to wounds, promotes adhesion (coagulation), primarily where signs of dryness or inflammation have subsided.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	When you have given some waters and feel that the belly has become bloated, then perform a bowel movement to remove what makes flesh in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And when you use wax drippings and dissolve them with oil or astringent; or when you cleanse that area using some medicines and ointments, which properties have already been applied in the tract of the waxes.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	If the fluid of the intestine is not flowing where it should through the catheter, then you must gradually increase that small amount therein and pause in a swaddled bundle made from Egyptian ointment or basil oil until it has been increased as desired.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	If the catheter is large enough, then you should attach it to its mouth and secure a sufficient amount of insertion in which lies within the bowel movement itself.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	If the patient'dict tools (or instruments) used for treatment are elevated above their body parts where they currently lie to ensure that blood circulation improves, when these tools compress into the curve of the body part which is inside them because it was created therein by nature itself.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If it is not possible to suction the sinus within the patient' extraneous body, then you must perforce what prepares their arm for lifting according to your desire and make sure that nothing prevents this movement of the limb inside them.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take combined restorative medicines that are applied appropriately along the course suitable for expelling those upward from under the cloth they wear.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	May that person who is on the bed (resting), which relaxes him throughout the day as long as water remains in his bra (bladder/urinary bladder).
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	To know if what passes down from the liver is moist or dry and indigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And so you should carefully examine the location of that swelling; if in it the patient feels pain or has an abscess present therein.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	When your medical care is prolonged in this manner, and the material that adheres to the bedcloth covering your navel sticks on, indicating stickiness, when you remove it today or tomorrow, change the cloth for another one and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May it occur that from the curve of his body space allows viruses to enter subtly; do not despair for him because healing occurs in those spaces where fat accumulthy waits, and when sickness arrives there through which you cause discomfort, here is hope.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the belly'seeks to expand because of indigestion for more than one day without settling down, you understand that it has expanded; and if there is delay in its settlement, adjust with medicinal draining, and when these are moist both by their substance and disposition, dry them up together along with the lubricant used to facilitate insertion.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And where the treatment is being applied today, it consists of wax drippings and its dissolution in olive oil, which rubs on the body with anticoagulant herbs mixed into that same substance, applying what'dict therein.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And when it seems in that way, as soon as you have entered and anointed with this wax (the enguent dyafinicon), while the patient is swollen inside, use it; or whereof frankincense and myrrh are mixed, spread over the melting fat thereupon, and apply linens soaked in water to that spot. Also apply these same oiled linen pieces with which you have used upon this body part (wherein has been inserted), rubbing it thoroughly while still warm; then sprinkle powder on top of them after application where they are wet from the moisture above, and continue until all dampness is completely removed.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Here are the translations line by line:
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the swelling persists and does not heal with this treatment, you will understand that corruption is in the bones or other hard parts/ligaments; at this point, take care of it as if treating an abscess (with antibiotics taken by mouth).
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of treatment for blisters caused by rubbing and cutting of fingers and making an incision.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have taken the amount of water we mentioned in division and it does not interfere with your care, then remove all excess that has been removed by the tongue, apply wax to this area where the fluid was extracted from, which will promote healing so effectively.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone and skin are safe, and its attachments will be brought down to parts of division, then you begin with pricking that part where your needle pierces flesh, carefully compressing it until a pulsing sensation appears under the spot where the point touches the bone; at this moment, push firmly on top and incise gently. This is done over what has been consumed by corrosive medicines within which there remains no healing—until that very part becomes entirely restorable through treatment with grease (which will be inside while it's being restored). With caution ensuring the inserted liniment stays put, thus aiding in its recovery.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the decay is already present in the bone, then you must insert it back into that place and extract it out here because at no time does a rotten bone heal within itself.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the urethra and bladder are coming into that place, then you must incise it in one of those places as seems proper for its healing, taking care to ensure that it is made well so that it may be restored to health.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	May if you percuss or probe the ulcer (ulcer is typically used in this context), and when that intense pain occurs, then take care to perform an incision on the surface of the spleen with a sharp tool directed above the transverse section below it; thus causing harmful effects upon the body'thy flesh which has become excessively swollen due to its position (presumably referring to congestion or blockage), and if this leads pain, take care that such fluid does not enter into the affected tissue. Here you make an incision on the spleen area with a sharp instrument above it—the transverse section below: doing so might provoke intense discomfort in the abdomen; thus ensure to prevent any resulting fluids from entering deeper body flesh that has become swollen beyond necessity due its elevated position (likely referring again to congestion or blockage). Here, you perform an incision on a spleen area with careful consideration not allowing excess fluid caused by the intervention—a typical medical approach in this context.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	May be adjusted herein among the thick-skinned men, because it is entirely flesh and bone or joints within them.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	When it is in the abdomen of him/her or when its birthplace is within his/her navel knots,
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	May not one born in swolthy nuts of this place become weak and suffer gout at the joints fiercely.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	From those who are fat by nature, their section is tender and it is necessary that you insert the needle into its joint (fibula).
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	May those who are born at the joints find cure difficult; therefore, keep yourself safe from them.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May he who is born in this land place the nut inside his body through digestion, and use one of those knives appropriately for him to be cured.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	May consolidation occurs between them due to their movements or because of home births that they did not experience themselves, or through child-rearing or fire exposure; thus the solidification is contained within where these individuals are returning back to their original shape.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And in between their sheets you place a layer of smooth clay to prevent them from solidifying into leggyards (i.dict the term 'leugierament' as hardening or setting), and separate those layers, inserting another thin layer of lead within each space so that it becomes consolidated accordingly once covered.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	If there is congestion in the hand'dict and it feels hot to touch (the heat felt on the back of one’s hands), then once you have dried that swelling as soon as possible, and shape it according to the form of the body part.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From weakness of virtue (indicating a lack of moral strength or integrity), they become swolthy/varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	When varicose veins are present, and they bring fluid accumulation within swollen black humors into the limbs of the body, primarily in the cushions (bolus) where these excess fluids gather most frequently among travelers and laborers and those who carry heavy loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Now when you administer the purge of cholera black few times for potent discharge from the patient'thy vein Basilica.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	Medicine can serve them in two ways: one is that it makes the black bile insensible and draws away its essence, and the other way is raising the vein and extracting it entirely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of the text translates as follows:
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Return that one (possibly referring to an affected limb or body part), and command them not to consume foods producing black bile causing illness.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Repeat the cauterization when veins become filled and blood rises up into the malady.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	May the elevation of them according to this practice be: you who raise the cushion for the thighs (camba del malaute), if in it they press their feet (motz pels), place it in water, soaking wet (embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda) until they swell up and veins are protruding; or if exercise is not present here with you now (banh no es tu present), then the limb becomes injured.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Return the neck to the middle of the vein either along the long or at the back end (tailbone) of it must be pressed down into its cavity, or in the base of the foot should one strike with a staff or stick.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity; and place your hand over where it appears in accordance with feeling, which is necessary because as that pain worsens towards blackness (death).
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And when you leave with it from under the neck, take that thin rope which is attached therein back again.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And take your tool that is inside which has been raised and held by the belt, place it down gently in a moment at most an hour.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Return another portion of that section and apply it to the crotch area down to where the vein appears above; then cleanse (or scrap) the hollowed-out region below thereof with an excoriating tool.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Here comes the text to translate:
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	Here comes the text for translation:
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If you don'thy extract and elevate it (the affected area), then insert a double-headed needle firmly into the spot, attach that needle, and rotate your hand throughout the entire entry point where pain is felt.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When that entire atmosphere has been expelled outwards, then rest on the location of the muddy clothing submerged in wine and oil (not rotten), and cure whatever is within it.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the vein is contracted and has twisted within its sections, which we have not mentioned before, then cut across that contraction over the entire part of the twist and in all locations where there is envelopment; place your hand inside so it does not rise up.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the patient in which it is fractured:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of anointing oil:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	Not accustomed to sitting as they are with their fingers or is it a sharp extremity that does not harm the vein, and where there's significant flexibility like a lion (implying strong limbs), even if subtle, can insert into the vein due to excessive bulk in this position.
De extraccio venae cruris.	From the removal of the vein of the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is born in the hollows of those lands where Al-Ateghi was on Earth and barren regions with little soil, where neither grass nor plant grows.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And when it is produced in other parts of the body through the channels (likely referring to blood vessels or lymphatic pathways), they are located within the sacks/cushions, holding their
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And when the gestation is from corruption that comes down suddenly through the coda of their anus with poisons derived from snakes and worms, which are born between the colon and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	Here comes the sentence to translate: "The sign of susceptibility for its arrival in that inflamed area is this vein you exacerbate here; and return it, whereby located (the location), which appears as if sprouting from a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the extremity appears, cover it with one of those wooden shields from which comes a dragon'thy weight; do not put that heavy wood upon its cushion but let it rest on top thereof only.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	When as many visits come due to any cause from afar in the patient' extraneous parts (likely referring to symptoms or effects outside of their immediate body), you cover them with lead and spices that thing, holding it there.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If it is prolonged, you will cut a part and wrap the swelling; do not insert that which has come out inside where it can be seen so as to cause suppuration and pus formation in the area and sore wound.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For that which is drawn out gently and little by little must be removed from the body entirely without twisting or causing discomgy in the limbs.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	From this vein in men who are at the end of their life, it has already ascended to me and reached twenty fingers' length.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	If it is inserted during the time of his medical treatment, then insert the needle into his abdomen and pierce that long abscess in the limb until all its fluid content within the matter is evacuated, administer putrefaction from this place for several days as part of medicines; take care of it accordingly for worm treatments.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein sometimes has twists, and mainly when it appears on the skin of the body or in the area of the joints, they become inflamed due to some ornaments; here comes a source sentence translated into English:
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And so take care of that ache which we have discussed in division and water, as has been mentioned earlier.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the worm generation under the skin and called it disease of cattle (likely referring to an infestation resembling mange).
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is called in no land free from our animal diseases because it moves among the bowels and veins with few of which are between the navel and the flesh, moving throughout the body and showing itself within each limb part whereby breaking through the belly and emerging out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The generation of it is due to the putrefaction of some humors along with worms and snakes, and maggots in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	E for the malice of him/her, when he goes on his feet and rises to his chest, then the liver becomes hot in him/her, and it is destroyed inside the body, leading them with regular movements afterwards.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you intend to heal and remove it, do not act without the use of your walking apparatus and observation of its sensation; therefore, tightly hold what is above it (the affected area) with dry hands that are strong from exertion there, applying pressure firmly until something comes out.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	If there is a blow to the body and it' extruded (perhaps referring to an injury or rupture), then stop using cautery on the spot where resides, and understand that this misuse leads directly to deterioration of its location herein.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	May if that being has reached the top of the hull (body), it will be strangled over the upper region with great firmness and pressure applied directly to them, taking out what is; as long as the malady uses moistening agents from its own body for medicine evacuation of putrid bad humors.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From above illness worsens or deteriorates furthermore.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is named in our land and it'thy pain occurs in the upper limbs; its transformation from member to member is permitted herein.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	Yeah, here already is that second person who advises you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You called upon a sick woman to a village, and found her arm with a small inflammation in the brachial vein; you pressed it for an hour, watching that inflammation move along as if pus were moving like living beings when crawling from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And now it enters into that place and settles in the muscle, here we apply for one hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	Return correction in the other limb until you reach the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	Here comes the translation of the first source sentence:
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	May not there be fluid in the vessels when they are present with a woman?
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	Even though it does not think that it is due to water (quetta), because the woman was made of heavy wood and her hollow parts and veins were discovered, here comes this mixed sensation.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that it does not appear again in those who are delightful and have hardened veins of conjoinment during this backward cure.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	When you want the patient'sup care, and they feel that pain, it is not apparent to your eyes at this moment; however, now tighten upon them gently in order of treatment today, dry up any moisture within so as to prevent its outflow (the inflammation being obstructed), and then cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	Mayhaps if you do not use the hands of lightness quickly, then treat that which has been evacuated from the body and what exhales winds inwardly; apply those foul pills and medicinal/comparable ones to it.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of joint extraction (assuming "de saceta" is a typographical error or misinterpretation
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	 From the extraction of stones (assuming "Sagetas" refers to kidney or gallstones), they are varied according to species, and by the parts of the body where I extract them from—those that have large points, small ones, concave shapes, and sound when tapped. They also include those with three angles (which could refer to a specific type of stone) as well as stones accompanied by tongues or chelates in their structure.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	Here comes the translation of the complex medieval medical text:
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	Therefore, if signs appear on your knees, do not attempt treatment or extraction of the stone unless necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	When the joints of the thigh are in the chest so that they are close to the left breastbone and a hard crust is formed therein as cause – it'thy not for cold, but rather its movement resembles that of the limbs (arms), crawling like black insects from below ground; this joint swelling along with feverishness, phlegm secretion, chilliness and fainting – therefore you understand death has seized all.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	When the lungs are suffocated by sanctified foam from worms and the vessels in the neck have been prodded, the color of the humors changes greatly, a great spirit exhales, and it demands an air purifier:
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	If the swelling is in the abdomen where it'dict to be at the waist, and the pain seems from the small backsides, then there will be a great piercing pain throughout with heavy breathing; not all of the body's limbs are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If there is a swelling in the stomach, then it often occurs due to some indigestible food of animals (probably referring to meat products).
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If the stone is in the stomach and fixed therein, a hole of the dirt or fabric may have been torn out by it, and hope for its extraction from within does not exist.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the stone is in the bladder and there'supurated urine has been expelled from it; any process that occurs outside of these parts may cause pain in the flank area, and you should know that this condition can be fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	May the other members be with you as your face, back, and groin; shoulders and assistants, spine of the two, shoulder blade, chest, hip joints, cushions for limbs, along with their likeness to body parts—are saved according to major dispositions when needle does not damage veins or arteries nor is it venomous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And you recommend that I have seen of these teachings, so as to indicate by them the way to treat (or cure).
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that in the home couch of their eye's tear lake within the nasal cavity and I extract it from another part of the body with other parts of its auricle, healing him without harm to his eyes.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	Extracted from another jugular in the patient'thy neck area, and pressed gently with fingers periodically; this lump was concealed but attached to one of their spears (probably referring metaphorically here), large like Turkish daggers without a pommel.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	When the Senate convenes, it does not happen in its own hall due to some unfortunate incident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	Extract another remedy from a man of Crest who was seized in the gallbladthy (gall bladder), and it was an Arabic medicine; this is what I have obtained for him. Now I encircle that between his ribs, which is already immersed in the gallbladthy of him; now I delicately handle that part, extracting it from there, and he gets well (healed).
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	Extracted from the home who was chased in his stomach and considered to have died because of it; thus, I kept him here for several days without any change due to their conditions being managed on that extraction matter, he recovered, and did not experience an accident at this place.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And perhaps there may be a place in which one can catch a maggot between the two of you (possibly indicating that they are lying down together), and where worms have been consolidated, so put some fire above them for an hour or so until the maggot is caught in the coccyx area.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And another man appears who scratches his face and solidifies the mud in it, without causing pain here or appearing sickly to these people.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	Extracted from the body of their lord king who was searched in my nose'se place and had already descended seven parts down into one small thing, and entirely hidden it all were.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And it is called for three days' care at his application of cupping therapy, or in English 'cupping'.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And so you have grasped the child from its bedstraw (a form of primitive mattress or resting place), and asked whether it is subtle there, without finding anything; perhaps that touch sensation through your fingers felt on the thigh' extraterritory (outside) indicates where this entity resides.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	Here comes the line to translate: E ampliarge el lugar donde actúa ingesta y digestión, confirmando para mí que ese lugar se convierte en sitio del estreñimiento, por lo cual aparece allí la constipación.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	E did not occur at the significant location that the scalpel reached; and you continued to work on it with forceps for days without occurrence, until solidified was formed inside of which I can feel my nose upon touching today.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Here I have adjusted in the manner of swift medicine within which I shall appear before my visual sight to observe the extreme part of the saddle and pass by for time as it occupies four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and they restore it along with crushed bone dust (which could refer to a form of treatment or filling for damaged nasal structures), thereby healing the swelling completely without recurrence in any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: The skilled craftsman compares much with water above, and what is present below; thus new operations and instruments must be used for removing external causes when sickness falls upon you.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	So it is said that sapphires are not taken out of the body parts where they are fixed, but by one of two methods: either through the place where they interlace therein; or contrary to the other separated portion.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	When someone enters through here or is descending into flesh in this place and comes out again,
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If you do not heed the medicine at the time it is needed, then take care that the meat within your body be consumed during these days until its departure from the body, and make adjustments to accommodate this process as necessary for treatment.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Even if it remains in the mouth and does not vomit as a result of your treatment, you should lay on this remedy daily for several days, and already they have been expelled (i.dict).
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If you do not obey the doctor'se advice and pierce through the course of bone in that area of your whole body which will subtly expand due to the treatment prescribed by the physician, then extract it out there.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the splint is fixed on the patient's skull and has progressed into one of the chest cavities, appearing in the bloated abdomen as these accidents which have occurred to them occur; if the splint penetrates the diaphragm, death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the scab is not fixed on the bone of the os and does not penetrate into the coccyx, it remains moist for a few days without worsening due to any causes from these accidents, then your intelligence should be applied in treating both the scab and its position.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	May it happen that there is difficulty in swallowing and you do not dare to remove (the obstruction), then apply warmth along the digestive tract' extrication way as we have recommended, with care for the location within which it has healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	May it be that the bone is also injured here and wounded in sentiment; if you feel this painful touch there, question that which tries to harm you now, and if such sensation persists within yourself, direct your attention towards these causes so as they may guide your healing approach.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	If you cannot cover it due to the contraction of mud and elongation of veins, here there are no nerves or vessels; then proceed over the mud where it is thickened so that extraction may be possible.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	If in your hand there are the ones that hold his flesh together where it has been cut off from all, then you must release (or tear) this part of the body; and if you cannot remove its detachment or breakage within those parts holding onto which he is weakened by obesity.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When you administer the extraction of pus in any location where it accumulable, then use your hand and forceps thoroughly within that formed mass; subtly employ gentle movements to ensure that the extracted pus is not broken apart and remains easy for you to handle during its removal.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you cannot cover that of your time, then lie down for several days until the parts affected in his body recover, and repeat this when you are healed again.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	May if you have contrary flow of blood (which might indicate inflammation or poor circulation), then apply the remedy we've mentioned for healing in your apothecary.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Here is the translation line by line:
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	So that you contract the swelling for that the hump is aligned according to the shape in which your lance should rest when used for contraction of the swelling, as it may be beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	May it not be within your power, but if so, then administer what is within your power for the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	May the slivers that have been extracted by another parting or any portion of what has already proceeded outward from this division cause further gaps in the wound area, and thus make it bleed more intensely; hence you must press on that spot with your hand—the second pressure according to how much blood is being drawn forth using forceps. And if they are causing a light feverish sensation above the pubic bone (coccyx), at times this may occur during treatment, and it's time for an action based on its intensity; apply as necessary care or intervention.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is retained in the bone, then turn as per contraindendo until the swelling enters into the bone itself and exacerbates therein; at that point extract said thing from there.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	If not, leave that for some days until it becomes red and raw again.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the flesh of the saddle is in that place, then you will push it there with force.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	May it be that the lance has been struck and you wish to administer inpulse; then insert your hand there, if mute/stiffened, with gentle force so as to thrust it into the hollow of his thigh within the groin area, pushing it along.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the scabbard is concave, then push that item forcefully into it, so that the scabbard becomes filled with that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the patient is dehydrated, then you must bend all their flesh where it truly exists if at all possible and give them water accordingly; take care to provide that which they need when needed.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the swelling is in the chest, abdomen, bladder or ribcage and it's pressing down so that you touch it with your hand, then there might be a possibility to press on that spot; take care not to harm veins or nerves. Remove that object if indigestion leads into digestion of the swelling (i.dict implying pus formation), treat until healed within.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps with which hooks are drawn out:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	These are their limbs like saws when they take them upon the bed to prevent them from lying down.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	From those are movements of the specials (specified types), large and small stones and pebbles; according to the magnitude of the disease'dictum and its paucity or abundance, as well as the size of the crowd inside it, and its constriction.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of thrust from this limb conquest suffers pain as if dragged by a donkey in it, and the pressure from that dullness:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of forceful movement in sounding limb(s):
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	aychemy when it is that his internal organ (the intestine) has been pushed into the concave cavity and is being forced by this pressure.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	De bloodletting from veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of which flow are customarily extracted through cauterization here, in the sixth month these vessels where pulse is felt with fingers (palpation); herbs that appear on both temples; and blood-filled channels within two chalks drawn from two feathers called aspexients; prepared vein at forehead location under heat, vessel present at nose extremity; guides located in the neck area; vessels found beneath lower lip (labia inferior); vessels also below upper lip (labia superior); these are known as algeles or gummer's blood vessels—and those within tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	May the veins that were cut in the breasts be red; from those is a cephalic one, and you must take care of it with wild herbs—the people call this “the Vein of All Limbs”, and its domestic counterpart where it's stopped within the chest is called "chalice", which they refer to as "belly vein". The arm cut-off veins are also managed here, specifically those cut over the fireplace; these are what appear on the limb itself—the visible manifestation of this. And ligature (a binding or tying off), and it is located between the mentioned auricular parts and small pus dotting area; present in two branches within our subject matter.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	In the foot and thigh there are three veins: one is that of the curvature of the popliteal artery (from wild lentil), and the second is saphenous, located at the level of the knee joint from domestic lentil; the sciatic vein is also in this location, as well as other similar veins related to these.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The strength of the veins connected to the ears is ancient and migrates, causing ulcers and sores on the head that are old as time itself.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Take the surgical knife (cutting blade), and it is that which enters inside you; take care to insert it at this time into the vein within where the bladder expels urine from the body.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	When you raise your hand above the vein and artery, respectively below them and inside of it, divide its channel.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	When the length of the inflammation is equivalent to that of two fingers adjusted or enclosed by fluid, then apply more warmth as desired.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Return strength to the pillows and let that which is healed rest therein.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And in the act of freeing them there was an incision made, and then they were subjected to cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	May the veins and arteries of the temples bring vitality from ancient and evil drainage, as well as excess fluid discharged into the hollows through vigorous pulsation.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And as for how you should perform that operation, tighten their thigh so that veins appear within it due to pressure and show its pulse with your tongue – at this point, you try (attempt).
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Here the joint (the hip) is positioned downward and pressure applied to it above the vein for an hour, then a pause over that spot where strengthened contraction restores health until healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And when it is time for their memory and understanding, they are brought into the common room of freedom.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	So, the bleeding of the facial vein is proper for treating ancient head illnesses and migradictions and festering sores on the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line as follows:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the protruding point where it comes up at the hollow above that vein, and press upon it with this or another cause in your hands; apply pressure to the wound of the varicose vein until healed as much as you wish.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	When the vitality of the two veins in the eyes comes from tears and sweat within these same vessels, and for facial illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The quality of cauterization is that it tightens the patient' extramandible joint with one bandage and applies such treatment on those parts; you stand above them.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: When surgery is performed along the transverse according to length of scalpel used for incision, it does not enter into flesh; and if the scalpel itself is delicate, then the limb' extrinsic part will be broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Return the heart to its course as much as is necessary and pause over those joints, tightening them for another day, and return that which has gone astray thereunto.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	May the bleeder of the vein in the nose confer fever and violent sweating, as well as facial illnesses and migrafal disorders that worsen on the face, especially when old age comes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of his bloodletting is that it tightens the patient'thy chest and places your left hand on their nostrils as you perform delicate bleeding under the head at the base of the neck, where veins do not appear here nor does the sanguine begin to flow. 
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	When you gradually take away your hand from the little finger (presumably some form of treatment or pressure), according to what is needed and after placing it on one spot for just a moment; that area regains its natural state again.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May the strength of laceration from surgery on wounds guide contraction and healing of syphilis, treatment of various diseases and infected sores as well as inflamed ulcers with acute pain similar to a haemorrhage.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And as for the quality of that patient'thy lumbago which strains at every joint in their lumbar spine; and it is held by the artisan over the back, with the hernia resting on a cushion.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Return the varicose vein to its length, and extract it from the leg secondarily as needed (when necessary), following each infusion or twice when required; likewise apply similar treatment to other swolthy veins.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Return the ligaments and tighten the veins to prevent the swelling from progressing further into that which is already ill (the patient'thy condition), so it remains within the womb of nature where healing takes place by itself.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you doubt it quickly and do not know which of those is the main one, then understand that you are referring to the prominent part shown by them, and their putrid discharge.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	When it seems like veins in the mouth are present,
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	May it be customary for some days that points are inscribed on the veins located in the upper thighs.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	May the veins from behind your tongue that rise to fullness be suitable for treating cefalyce conditions in the throat, including problems of the uvula and oral diseases, thus:
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And as for the quality of performing that operation which follows immediately afterward through your hand into their body space and raises the tongue of them while observing occasionally the position and coloration of each vein: when any one turns to black, it indicates deteriorating health conditions.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And now apply pressure on each one of them; be careful not to press too hard onto those areas where the blood flows through these veins (vein).
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Your veins that have been punctured in the groin are found where circulation occurs throughout all humans, and this is how it'se done according to two methods; either insert a berry or an olive with delicate downward motion for flebectomy, or use a needle-like instrument while calling out softly (to reduce pain), which constitutes the method:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And here it is how one should gather and assemble these fine and subtle species according to the extent of the veins and their narrowness.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of mustard-soaked sponge:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	sometimes their veins swell thick and visibly fuller, and it is decided to open these concave filled vessels for them that contain large amounts of blood clots.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is how one performs catgut surgery:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This patient requires less invasive and more delicate instruments for bloodletting of the fine veins that contain subtle humors inside.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May the strength of the basilic vein extraction (one of three veins), which is extracted from the legs and belly due to illnesses that come down with coughing, be known for this purpose.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	When the lancet holder arrives, as soon as they perform that incision which instills fear in them and once every ten times an artery is encountered, if it's incorrectly adjusted at the puncture of the lancing device, insert that artery back into its place so that no longer does one lanch on their own life force with such a knife.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the basilica does not appear for obvious manifestation, then you must place that and another therein (the patient'dictions), or secure a peg here within your arm; where this appears, perform cautery at its end of the limb - do so with fleabotomies as directed.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you wish to perform the operation of your patient's chest, gently press down on the arm at the point where you come into contact with the area between the palms (which is called 'locus articularis'), and place a bandage over their hand; secure the arm firmly like when drying it after removing fluid from a concave vessel used for bleeding, paying close attention to ensure that tapping on this space indicates blood flow through arterial spaces.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you press and stretch the ligament, it inflates in the place where you have touched with your fingers, and thus also that swells due to blood flow from an artery; therefore, avoid that area.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	If you see the sanction flowing during an incision with silver from a child's artery, then understand that it is of the arterial blood; and your finger touches over this for long spaces; place your finger there, if the sanction has detached itself, move back gently as directed by strength in arms.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	Guard your patient'thy humors of thy body and keep them in a state above fear for as many days until they heal.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	May not the sanction be detached, and if you do not have medicine for it at hand, then trace the artery where present; when its extremity is contracted, the sanction detaches; what comes out now must come down to this location—hold one band tightly around that part over the area of constricted veins along with ligaments within other days.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	When the sanction has detached itself, then it (the issue or complication) occurs; otherwise, care for that which came before its separation as part of remembering where the sand particles have dislodged from the area around the wound(s).
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The translation of each line from Latin-influenced medieval medical text into English is as follows:
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	May the incision of the black vein is skillfully performed above the raised section at the head and below the knee joints; therefore it consists of pieces from basilisk bone and calves' bone, as we have said before.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If a vein is between two nerves, then make the vein in its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The lancet of vein puncture for the carotid artery is to extract the humors from the head and alleviate the illnesses of the fluids.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	Here it is: In this place, if you wish to puncture the abdomen with a lancing needle made of olive or mirto; here lies salvation for all veins and will not harm any artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	May you therefore need to perform the operation of cauterization that protects so much as it does not pierce through the patient'thy scalp, and secure its position with pressure points, unless at first touch due to percussion over this area indicates additional courses are necessary for said procedure.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Whenever you are far from the patient' extrinsic areas and have not performed an incision during the initial touch, it is not noticed that this aplication of points.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	May be due to this surgery and these accidents that you should consider its correction in them.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first source sentence translates as follows: The one from whom you know that the bloodletting is not administered but for conservation of health and hope, and where bleeding should occur in a vein within the leg (be it the cephalica, femoral or basilic), namely on an empty stomach after breakfast and lunch, taking into account signs indicating repletion.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And if it is necessary for a bleeding cautery, do so at the third hour or before dinner on that day which has passed three hours since morning.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	May incision that is administered may occur at any time of day or night when necessary and convenient for the patient's condition; in every moment and throughout all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	When the time for cauterization has not yet come (after four years), and when a woman is pregnant, she should not be subjected to cauterization until the seventh month of pregnancy, nor should those who have already passed these seven years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	When one wishes to perform an enema for any reason and they want the bowel preparation done before cleansing with a lemon-based clyster if there are fissures held together during this process, so that veins do not protrude excessively in the rectal cleanse of these fistulas which are inflamed, and prevent from affecting the main organs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	E they are not suffering from fainting due to sickness or demonic influence until the cure-given water is returned to them, nor a fever of cholera and malady in their body; perhaps faintings because of colic pain or vomiting, abdominal issues, constipation/diarrhea from meals or nightly watches/vigils and all causes that dissolve their spirit (both physical and animal).
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	Consider carefully in the subtlety of humors since if the sanction is thickened by meats and drinks, or through medicine it'se possible to return this fluid back into its course.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	When bathing is necessary and not restricted by any cause or if it's due to some exercise for that the sanction becomes subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	When the bleeding from the patient's wound in their chest stops, it is time for the third hour to arrive, as we have discussed.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	Even then, if that day there are many misfortunes of animals for you with tightness, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents occurring together along with excessive pain above need, distressed as they may be holding their hands:
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And in his sense of smell are present causes, which is how men habitually use scents and aromatics according to their capacity for such things.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	Follow the lancet maker over a thigh that has been pricked or on which there was supposed to be lancing done by him who made it.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	If it is a swelling that has not yet reached the groin or if the swelling is excessive, do not let the flow of blood proceed; otherwise, prevent movement in the area where the pain occurs (the sac). If it's mild inflammation, restrict movements within and around the sack.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Apply pressure on the stricture, which that person who underwthy an incision has caused his implements between them while their veins are inflated and declared by sensation.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	So, for this reason, the surgeon must be firm and solicitous in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is apoplectic or bleeding out (the patient' extruding blood), lay them down for a day or two without tightening the bandage, otherwise strong lime may strike and aggravate the abscess that must be cauterized. Nor immerse in water baths during this time.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And if further incision is necessary (if she desires), then perform cauterization again using an oxyacetone lancet, and place your
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if you discover it's small and subtly scarred, fearing that the amount you wish to remove might be too much, then perform further incision in this troubled second part of treatment and adjust your cutting tool on the wound—the location will become cauterized once touched. The area where you make contact becomes singed (cauterized), preventing excessive bleeding within these small scars when they are just barely visible, often found among home remedies used in limited quantities.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	May you see that there is already an apostle placed upon it (the patient), and do not disturb him further on this occasion—nor does he excuse any cause; pause over some part of the opening in the hole for a while, which alleviates the pain of the body.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is better here than with other such things.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If a great suppuration occurs in the location of the incision, there will be continued flowing and mostly at that spot where it is not bleeding but just leaking fluid, or perhaps near an opened vein (and your hand), press on it with a damp sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly scraped over. Thereafter leave for one hour; the suppuration will have dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	When covering up moisture from that vein of said person or another, as complementary means necessary to do so are provided (with the implication being either a cloth or other suitable material).
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If there is any darkness or green sickness in the place for a few days, do not worry; and if you wish to pause over that which causes fever or black bile dissolution, or from honeydew sap or juniper berries, hold your reasons here.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	E methodically extracts arrows and prominent points of incision from the base, for vulgar surgery.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And so rest your hand on that area, and if you must apply pressure with a compress, do so there; for it is both evil and bad illness—and be mindful of any cause mentioned herein through which the blood flows from the sanctified artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an emetic is used in which the location becomes hardened and this substance also takes care of whatever else needed for healing to occur within it.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	When you extract from the sanctity of the body according to its vitality and color, that which comes out follows accordingly with the sanctity.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the sanction is black, then you must apply and insert until it becomes moist; if it appears thick, continue applying until it becomes subtle; similarly, when gout occurs, ensure that its sharpness does not reach outwards.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	Where there is a person who is weak and needs extraction of blood during fasting, the puncture of veins should be expanded, both large (flebu) and small (vein).
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	When someone has flux, their contrary will be that as well, and whatever extracts it in regulated courses, make sure to keep it steady.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best method for administering medication through a venous fistula is not by making an incision; rather:
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This cutting of the veins is saved from bleeding and loss of nerve function; a good one was put in place according to tradition and duration.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If there is inflammation of the complexion, then bleeding during phlebotomy should be stopped with an infusion in wine flavored with spices such as cinnamoman (cinnamon), canela (cane sugar), gingiebre (ginger), and saffron or aromatic medicinal oil that is also fragrant.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If you are suffering from syncope (fainting), it is due to an evil spirit of the mind, and thus they bring forth poison in breathing water vapor mixed with aromatic substances; use fragrant essences at your will, apply them on your chest as well.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	When using other causes that have been mentioned in Part II of diarrheal discharges for expulsion,
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	Whoever wishes to remove their arm and dissolve the sick blood with what comes from this opening through cathartic motion, its fluid is bile that gradually evacuates small amounts of blood daily, according to the quantity present in continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	May those who intend to work on their arms and shoulder blades have strong shoulders; apply pressure for seven or nine hours after the first surgery.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	May who wants to draw their limb away from the division where it tends downward find that such an occurrence happens on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	May that part of the body in which it bled and was injured be heated up and cause fever; for if a woman bleeds during pregnancy, or menstruation with large quantities flowing rapidly inside where blood accumulable could happen, resulting from negligence on his/her part. You will have maintained all conditions of fistula drainage intact; place your hand over the pulse points below this area to prevent it bleeding out, especially when a healthcare provider is ignorant or neglectful.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	When you intend to unfasten the arm and evacuate the sanctum following a proper cleansing time, if already its lock is oiled with blood vessel essence and difficult pus from the sanctum exists which makes it hard for your pressing effort under that urgency – this situation seems too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Having the finger inside that has been lanced; or take away whatever is coagulating in the puncture site of the vein – either there, at the deep chamber (the heart), or elsewhere on the body where it needs to be compressed with a heavy object.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If a vein is distended, do not touch it lest the inflammation worsen.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If it is necessary for you to induce bowel movement, there'se no excuse; then proceed by stimulating that part of the body or in another vein (i.e., arm).
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	When the referred "vein of the arm" is punctured in the dark or place of origin, it consists only of that which was not treated (not anesthetized or otherwise damaged).
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the bloodletting for them is that the bubo becomes embedded in their body fluid inside where it darkens and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And fix its strength on that which is already the ligament of narrowing here; and position it according to the transverse small part without being longitudinally or lateralized in any way.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And it is both the wide opening and your incision at which you make an entry there, into that joint where a small one will be inserted.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	If the flow of blood is prohibited, then repeatedly immerse in water until you fulfill your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	May you be in the summer days, then if you are sick with excessive sweating (which might indicate a hot condition), and your legs rest on the back of water during bathing time to alleviate it; while waiting for recovery at home:
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The Flebectomy of this vein is placed to save all other veins and nerves that have not yet been pulsing, here comes the translation:
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	E the trepanation of the skull cap is provided for head illnesses in the child'thy foot.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	Here comes the line to translate: E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; 
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And keep your hand on the finger joints for as long as possible, until there are no more tendons of the exposed bones left to touch with their nerves.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Here comes the translation of each line from medieval Latin-influenced text into English:
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	When extracting the sanctus according to necessity, pause over the vein and salt, so that it is not congealed together; seemingly performing in all parts of the body at once.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	May the strength of that operation on her right leg be given for those illnesses in the womb (or uterus).
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	When it seems like there is pain during lying down as well, similar to what was experienced on the other occasion.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The vitality of the vein sephena from the fistula is for illnesses present in the body parts below and similar with those due to menstruation, retained periods (menstrual blood retention), old hernias or scars on thighs/knees, as well as their semblance of diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	Here comes the sentence to translate:
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	So apply a poultice made of more moisture and salt to the thigh or heel cushion area of your foot; it is better for these purposes.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	If a boil appears on the face of the body, then guard your nerves which are adjacent to where that spot has appeared on the face, and pause your incision at this point if you wish to insert it further.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	Whenever it is necessary for the bleeding to cease, you shall intervene with forceps or a similar instrument
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	Whenever the sanction is forbidden, you shall wash their body in the tail water and let the sin run until it has been expelled from there.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cauterist errs in their first attempt at bloodletting, repeat it a few times until they reach the proper place where venesection is safe; do not fear of ill-effects from this procedure, but guard yourself against harm to your nerves as we have mentioned.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	When something of the other person's soul enters uncontrollably in this manner (entering or manifesting), it refers to a symptom related to the patient's body and spirit,
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And from sciatic nerve issues, pain often reaches down to where we have described above for the ankle joint of the right leg. (This translation attempts to convey a description likely related to lower back or buttock referred pain affecting the foot due to complications with the sciatic nerve.)
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And for this joint' extrusion, it is often considered dislocation of your hip when you manipulate (correct or adjust) the position through manual techniques. This suggests that manipulating the affected area might help with conditions related to misalignment or subluxation at the hips which could be
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And regarding the condition of your hip dislocation (flebobotomy), it is like inflammation inside along with tension and strain in the groin area underneath a tight bandage placed below at the knee joint, although this might not appear immediately but will soon. This sentence implies that after such an intervention or injury related to hip dislocation there can be symptoms of internal swelling (malaute) along with tension and straining sensations in the groin area due to tight bandaging applied below at knee joint, which may not manifest immediately but will develop over time. It reflects a traditional understanding that such injuries could lead gradually rather than instantly noticeable signs or symptoms requiring vigilant monitoring post-
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	Therefore when it appears, apply that hip dislocation treatment each time you are able and according to the direction (which seems unclear—possibly referring to specific movements or techniques), which is better; if applied internally through injections or externally via a syringe/needle sequence, then the affected area will be relieved. Here it appears there was an intention not only to treat but also prevention of worsening by immediate and appropriate application—whether that treatment meant internalizing medicine (likely referring to injecting medication) into the body or externally applying a formulated substance in layers through sequential methods, this approach will provide relief for where
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: She is in great pain; and if that suffering persists throughout her body without relief for anyone else (meaning no one but herself), a fever may develop, appearing on any part of her body including both thighs, palms of hands, ears, and ankles.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	Guard your nerves, and let the spirit flow through as much as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Return and tighten over the site of incision and strain it will heal.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	From winds and concerning those uses of them which are possessed by that person.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Joint pains come from corn silk, or earthy matter, or wool fibers.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When joint pain is caused by cold humors (wind), either of them being inflamed or extracted from their sanctum (body): one through cutting and removal, and another through its own cutting action.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This abrasion that is being cut out or scraped off according to either of these two ways (with a knife focus and/dictum) comes second due to the mannerisms described above.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Even if the scab is taken out of the skin, it comes from small capillaries spread in the flesh; therefore not removed by cutting along those veins, nor can one remove when warts occur due to repletion inside where all parts are expelled through various means. (Here refers to a treatment method for warts that does not involve excising them directly or using forceps.)
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	May it be necessary to provoke a breeze for illness or continuous issues immediately at the mealtime of that day and during evening in their bedroom space; do so throughout any time they are there, including nighttime hours.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet:
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And when it happens at any cause of those things, especially on the third or fourth day after their passage through the body during daylight hours one to three times, they command that wind disease be taken as a painful condition passed throughout the body.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And when the vitality of the head is influenced by wind, and it connects with gravity at the top of the head and sinks into the humors within the body, there may be an overall expulsion from all parts of the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This windup is in the location of trepanation for the skull (translation attempt with possible historical and linguistic interpretation):
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not known that one should apply oil or where there are boils present; for this brings great harm to the patient.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	Through which means I use that, and in the crowns where ill humors frequently flare up.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	May those who continue to forget it over there fall into the lap of ignorance; and because you command that the bellows operator pause briefly at each juncture with a small puff from the bellows, they fear falling into oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	May wind of blackness is in the location for phlebotomy of the dark vein and basilica: therefore confer this with asthma, and constriction of breath and division of sinew into lungs, chest tightening, and coughing.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	When a small amount of wind enters the body and is paused for some time, it weakens both the feet and the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the winding of anointed oil relieves accidental pains in the head and eyes, escapes away, focusing on toothaches down the jaw joints; it is at the location of mouth surgery (or dentistry).
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	When you command the bellows not to press your hand so that it does not cut an artery and cause blood flow,
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	When the wind causes discomfort in the chin and gums inside the mouth, it is associated with illnesses present therein; these are located at the site of dental surgery for those who have them on their lips' edges.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	When it is feverish that affects the hips (using hot irons), which occurs by means of heat accumulation, thus providing warmth to this area.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	E the vaporization of joint divisions discharged from the focuses provides good relief through lithotomy of three veins, which are basilica, umbilical (fusca), and cephalic (cefalica), wherein those fingers placed into all these veins inserted therein will enable their smaller counterparts to reach the larger ones via conduction.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	When commanded by the suction device, it shall not proceed in incision, for where flesh is stripped away, immediately afterwards their nerves and arteries will be exposed.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is about this breeze under which they blow over the abdomen' extrémities and infected sores, where foul-smelling breaths come out intermittently with bloody discharges from wounds; here we must apply treatment to these conditions.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	When you command the windlass to be a strong breeze and from earth, into places of deep cavity it goes rapidly with small subtle pinpricks until they are scraped off in the process called scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	May gentle breezes from the cushions for gradual manifestation, and they touch all over the body, soothing old rheumatic pains and menstrual cramps in women' extruding fluid; causing bleeding (menstruation), discomfort of both sides (dysmenorrhea), and stand ready at sites suitable for cauterization or surgical intervention.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	Even so, they disrupt all parts of the body and cause fainting in people'dictor (I) 'and despite that,' patients may experience a loss of consciousness due to various factors affecting their entire bodies ('mot deb
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	However, the strength or vitality is derived from the breath of those who carry their cushions ('lejuventem'). In other words, patients gain health and well-be018; through contact with individuals carrying protective devices for them (cushions). Here 'levent' likely refers to someone providing care that helps maintain
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the cushion bearer's position is that it stops bleeding during menstruation and soothes early labor pains without extending the period for blood flow; moreover, it retains urine at rest times to prevent leakage (bleedings), managing retained fluids in a timely manner when they occur. This suggests that cushions or supports provided by those taking care of women during menstruation and early pregnancy labor pains are not only beneficial for comfort but also serve therapeutic purposes, such as reducing blood flow excesses associated with these conditions without causing additional complications like prolonged bleeding. The mention indicates an understanding that cushions help in maintaining the patient's health by ensuring proper urine retention and prevention of menstrual irregularities due to physical restraint or support during periods when such body functions are heightened, which
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	It does not cease to flow and continue while observing the location where it turns red and swells, indicating that there appears a complaint of pain (desire). In this context, 'it' likely refers to urine or menstrual blood—substances whose presence in an abnormal state signifies potential health issues. The bearer is advised not to interf
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And when you scrape and repeatedly suck on each part of the body, take note in their disposition/state.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	When that person has a rare kind of thick skin and you do not treat them or apply pressure to the area so it does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	When commanded by the bellows maker, increase the incision and apply a poultice immediately for easy absorption.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	If the sanction is swolthy, then you shall scrape it downwards repeatedly; in the first treatment, open up and introduce moisture into its interior and that of yourself.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	May now be in the second act of acquiring knowledge about removing the thick stone (presumably referring to gallstones or similar hardened deposits).
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	If the sanction is due to faecal matter, then cut through the smooth part of the intestine so that it continues its course properly.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	At the end, when we extract small amounts of blood from either foot or leg enough for us, that's sufficient bleeding required.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	If we wish to extract the sickness, cut it with a knife and wound (scarification); but if our sickness is thick, then let us first make an incision before cutting through flesh for extraction.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The term of cauterization in which only the depth of the navel is involved.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the bowel is thick, hard, black, and its pores are struck, so that the places of the fistulas become lubricated, softened, opened up; if in summer time, add oil from aloe or crushed violet flowers, or ointment for bruised joints applied directly to it, or honey dripped over it (and) liver compresses using linden leaves and chamomile petals during winter.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the excess is thick and heavy, quickly, apply honey, or oil of lavender, or oil of aloe, or wine vinegar, according to their appearance.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	May it be that the bellows is made of large pieces of intestine tendon, and must not contain oil, nor to this they should apply any wind-catching device placed in their locations; these catchers shall only have vinegar from grapes or cold water poured over them by servants, resembling that.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	That which it is of moisture from the heart washes their breaths with water drawn from myrtle and sumac, or similar substances to them; these are brought to them.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	From that of which the superfluous are thickened, wash their nostr extrication with vinegar from ancient apples or water from almonds, or honeydew juice of elderberries, or cucumber decoction—and by this likeness.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	E cover that the wind is protected by bathing; they have vessels for administering part of the bath to it for an hour or two, and covering where the wind resides.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What should be done so that the wind-absorbing bloodletting is performed before venesection (bloodletting procedure).
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	When considering the meal: when the warm air blower or that which is used for fleece removal comes with cold wind and chilliness on your body, causing constriction and inflammation, where these are caused by dampening factors such as acidic honeydews, endive greens, lettuce leaves, sage seeds, vinegar, lemon juice, and their likeness.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	When their food is withhubble (likely meaning mixed or improperly prepared), and barley brewed beer as well as grain-based dishes are present, they appear to resemble leprosy patients in symptoms.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	From that which the complexion is fair and breathes out steam in fever or vinegary fumes of seed essences, sage, and mint; it should be advised to use little wine and food intake, pause meals between Christmas and Epiphany; for them eat poultry pie, cabbage casseroctlz, honeycomb dainties, watercresses, small frogs, young birds.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	When in the day of bloodletting and fever reduction, it is said that its drink must be greater than food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	When it is given in wine for some hours to certain Alchemist-doctors or musc/musket oil, and administered hereby either through the winds (inhalation) or by applying directly on the body parts so that the main limbs become comfortable, and no harm comes from its use.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	May the windblown scars that are being punctured be calming their feet, and on hips and gout, as well as in the umbilicus region; at these locations of joints, none of those body parts suffer from puncturing.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	Not for those but the attack of humors within a member's limb, they suffer with pus-filled pressure upon their chest and navel in sickness caused by an upward flow of phlegm from the throat; using that to dissipate swiftly rising mucous moisture within the body, while also applying it on the abdomen and umbilicus—this alleviates the discomfort associated with such fluid accumulation.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	Here is the translation line by line:
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	When resembling occurs as it is paused on the breastbone and the winds are circulating in those areas,
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These breezes are administered with a suck only, and some of them at the fire's flame.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	When water purification measures are fully administered in the ailments of the womb,
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When the wind gets stronger and it is filled with thick water alone or in which some medicinal plants are suitable, this is why there'dict solely moisture (or simply "moisture").
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The form of wind administration at the focus: it is either two lances with their extent as we have formed them; and the quantity of powder its measure by one palm, in the place where they are located within this circuit, small according to the amount that enters into us through a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It is a pain caused by excessive heat or hard-edged substances like lemons, lions, and sharp objects that do not allow the body part to maintain its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	Whenever it is metal or wax torch passed through (the patient's) waistline (or area), a candle light at the focus there shall be stopped.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this is the great wind we have treated from that which has been mentioned, and its weakness according to those illnesses and the state of whom it affects.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	When it is necessary for points to be made on the surface of the foot, then use a pointed cautery (pointed instrument used by doctors in medieval times).
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of burning this flame over the limb is to gradually light a candle wax at the edge of one small candle, and place it where the fire meets in the area of the inflammation, so that the flame can be maintained until not even part of the malady'thy appendix bursts.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	Here is the line by line translation of the medieval medical treatise:
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And with fire according to its nature, and repeat that if there are signs of inflammation from that one,
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	May there be a vapor that is administered in the malady of pluripain, and without cross or rupture within it, only filled with water, resting solely on the limb.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is how it should be done: This is the way of using it: The more extensive this opening becomes, the better, so that a large amount of water can enter.
Capitol .xcvii.	Capitol .xcvii. (The ".xcvii." here likely refers
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	In regions where bloodletting (sanguissuguas) cannot be applied to small body parts due to their diminutive size—such as the joints, tongue, and gums—bloodletting must instead target exposed or denuded areas like an empty limb. Here's a possible translation into English:
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	The quality of using those bloodsucking creatures that are found in the fleshly skins beneath our noses:
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	Return their leg dressings to the day and night immersion in water, so that they are nourished but not causing any internal discomgy within them; administer bowel evacuation through enema or clysters herein used for this purpose; apply heat internally into the swollen member of the hernia until it reddenes; and place their dressings on top thereof.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	When filled up and case occurs.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	If it is possible to suck out the place with air (which likely refers to drawing fluid from an abscess or similar swolthy area using a tool like a leech), then they may bring relief in joyfulness/he
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	But if not, wash the location with water (suggesting an alternative treatment method), and it will be cleansed thoroughly/rapidly.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the leg'supremacy becomes prolonged and blood flows out (hemorrhage), then you press a linen cloth into it while standing in cold water, stopping that which has come forth from within.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the sanction multiplies, then sulphur dissolved in three parts is applied to it here; or small stones and other causes specific are placed undernethy's feet there where they stop; when beans cooked down have been removed from their pods (their cause), and these beans adhere at the location, so too does the sanction withdraw.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, repetition of bloodletting when possible, changing those (the methods or tools used for the procedure).
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If blood discharges are prohibited from suspension, then they must be rubbed where freshly coagulated (or an iron pin is kept within the area where it has begun to seep), and their pauses should be maintained until I feel any such fluid secreted again.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	When you wish for a poultice on those areas, sprinkle just a little powder of ash or salt, and then apply it quickly.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	After starting with restoration: of purity.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary in the practice of medicine; it concerns restoration and treatment for broken bones and displacement incidents involving the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh child, heed this wise man who boasts of his knowledge among these learned doctors and charlatans, one time not respecting the free men nor reading those ancient letters (likely referring to classical texts or medical literature from antiquity).
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	Because of this reason, our medical science is excluded; we have never neglected it at any time, and did not apply resources until now, but only after extensive reading from the works of Ancient scholdicts to understand their thoughts on these matters, up till which point I extracted knowledge.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	With this adjustment or in my current life span for an extended period of study and experience.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol primier.	Capital First.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Sum of all collections from the bone breakage, which is necessary before we begin to recall the fingers and diverse parts related thereto (of a single individual).
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Cover then that we speak in the introduction of this chapter about the essence of these topics, and understandings within which during discussion it becomes clear to both speaker and listener that they know or can learn this noble craft from one another.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And when you experience a bone fracture or dislocation or twisting injury, then if there is no specific cause preventing it, treat as follows: with cauterization of the affected area or realignment of that particular individual, especially if they are debilitated, weakened, in advanced age, or experiencing severe pain and inflammation.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	Here is the translation line by line:
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And return the intestine (it) back to its proper place in which it customarily stays, according to what has been mentioned earlier.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the bone breaks begins to be repaired, it is necessary that the humors (bodily fluids) are cut from foods nourishing with substance and heavy in which its viscosity resides; similarly as for these types of foodstuffs—wheat flour boiled in water, rice, fruits, milk products like cheese or yogurt made from cows' milk, fresh poultry, fish fillets, large grains and their counterparts to them (substitute), which aid the coagulation of blood fragments left after injury—all these are used.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	Be aware that bones crack when they are in the bodies of those who have aged and become frail; it is not possible for them to remain continuous or solid according to their natural state due to drying out (loss of moisture).
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	Evenly and consistently they are strengthened according to their nature for as long as necessary for the purification of those members, just like bones in infants grow steadily with time.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Indeed nature adjusts and strengthens over the fractured bones of any part that seems swolgy like gluten in which you bind together those who are conglutinating with each other, inside where venom from strong digestion and firmness is present as if there's a flame during consumption; however, no cause forbids one’s own work within.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	For this reason it is necessary to pause the foods of the malady (the humors), which have weight and viscosity and thickness, as we have mentioned.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	According to different types of bone breakage according to different parts of the body.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	When you recall all kinds of bone breakage separately in their respective heads (chapters), here begins the account:
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Motley diverse types of fracture in himself/herself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	Here are the translations line by line:
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	The entire specialty is in providing relief for each specific location as it comes into memory:
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Mention of bone fracture (Note that this translation attempts to convey a general meaning based on understanding from multiple languages;
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And regarding a bone fracture (Note that this translation attempts to convey the general meaning based on understanding from multiple languages): it is curvature of the limb, and about its protrusion or extension as felt by you when examining it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	When there is neither twisted appearance nor evident bone damage upon touching the bones and thigh with force without causing great pain to the patient' extrication isn’t hereby needed.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	1. Habentz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon non cove que tu mangas aquell am la tua ma y compresio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas w hich remind you of the moment when they were needed at that location; and apply it tightly for subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	E understand that the place where it arches and does not split into two or another when they come together at their sitting, once the entire division of the patient'thy body has been considered by those who attend to them as soon as an abscess comes upon them in a rush.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If an abscess occurs and needs to be lance, allow it for as many days until the abscess ceases, then apply heat therapy using whatever means you can rise or generate warmth; this will ease their pain if possible through movement and engagement.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	You understand that I have placed a softer object than bone under and on the body, where it aches due to satiety (fullness).
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Return that second one strengthened by its memory arrival.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If the bone is satagized (inflamed or broken), then it may be necessary to extend this limb, whether it's leg or arm; if the body part is small, use your hand; otherwise, apply pressure on tendons or a single cord and hold with your hands.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	When you touch it at this time beneficially with your hand and if hereby any different cause is seen, correct that immediately according to the extent of your intention.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Excessive stretching and compression, as the doctors who frequently use such movements in their procedures caution, may lead to an abscess forming through one' extrication or contraction of a limb during treatment.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And it is that quality of a relaxed member' extrinsic properties are what I recommend; thus you understand that members vary in their smallness and largeness, as well as in the shape of these.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	When those who are small arms and legs come like birds to these individuals, it is necessary that their wrapping be of a thin cloth undernethy.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	May those who are heavy with the thigh or couch have a cover that is tight and durable; where this layer connects the large and strong parts of the entire body within its boundaries, so they do not wander in it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Here begins the treatment, apply pressure to your bowel evacuation until sufficient time has passed for that which was fractured in three or four layers around the member; tightly hold onto a small part of the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Return the splint to its position in the area of the broken place and hold it tightly so that your constriction does not move from where you have placed it on the site of the breakage.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Here comes the translation of each line:
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And place your hand over this other bandage, and apply the poultice to these wrappings gently so as not to infect or develop an abscess therein if no infection occurs at that location; let it be for a few days until all signs of infection disappear. And keep yourself rested on top of those dressings.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	These are the legs of a canna bean, and they have been carefully made; or from wood; or from palm branches; each leg according to this shape and form.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the splint placed over that fracture is thick and a small one has been applied to other splints, with its length according to what you've observed on the limb in both size and height; place your strong hand above those splints as per your first instruction regarding the swelling. It should be positioned at the foot of the injured leg following strictures mentioned earlier, adjusting accordingly as it extends from the fracture site with time.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	Where the threads are thick and thin in texture, and of their substance; if they are large, let them be seen by pulling back the tendons during the operation with tools like leather straps, which would be a great error when the stiffness comes out of equality.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And subtle instruments are not convenient to use with the water you wish for; do not attempt them when there is a gap of more than one day between the stones (or bones) and their connection, as it may disrupt healing or cause harmful effects.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	If the uterus is led through the extremities of the bones and tightens in your places, delay briefly those who push it further so that injury does not occur therein.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some injuries are childish (meaning minor), and there is a displacement in the spine; here comes memory to return at that very place of special significance.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	E know that when all the body parts are broken on the first day; this causes further damage to those parts if you do not rest them here for days seven or more according to your judgment of the coming wound healing process with cautery application.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is how medieval healers treated injuries caused by things that led to breaks and dislocations as well as twisting (fracture, dislocation, and torticollis).
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Manipulation of the splint applied to cool down after a fracture is convenient for complex movements and mainly in the legs and feet; because it neither produces heat nor humidity: hence, one uses powdered talcum (talc), and bone marrow pulverizes movement within the limbs of the cast.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	When you comfort them as well (as), otherwise break their humoral book and pause the softness of him/her not tightly nor subtly, use that which is obtained from it.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Autotherapy for fracture and dislocation with: asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and mint thyme (all ground from the bark of one hundred thousand locusts), mirrha, and aloe vera plantain leaves; when the complexity of the wound is opened by water or albumen poultice application. Herein lies a beneficial composition that restores broken bones post-trauma through its use in this treatment:
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Other than for plastering (cast), the following ingredients are used: white ichor of dragon x times, gum resin and dragon' extrécies y times, myrrh from dragon z times, frankincense/dragon a times, poplar sap b times.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All are crushed in mortar and pestle, they have poultices made of water or albumen and their medication is administered here.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Manipulation of the splints and bones apart, there arises pain in those places; a drawn-out thread is taken and immersed in oil and wine mixture, then placed upon that location: this suture holds fast.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	May not in this cast be from restoration or purge and pains removed properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Other cauterizing materials that restore the cuts include branches of fig trees and thorns from violets, all used for making a dressing or plaster.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Manipulation of the plaster applied for bone fracture restoration and when you wish to resolve osteomyelitis: a mixture of elderberry, cloak fabric, rose petals, wheat flour, all parts divided into three portions; these are threes cuts made with it on/as if there is no injury.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is cut or injured, comfortably apply that same water of the colon and/dictum to soothe the wound.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Other irritation of applied plaster for healing that the first, when you have hardened an abscess to treat it: recipe from aloe and wheat germ oil, seed honey, musk root, mint, violet flowers, chamomile blossoms, all parts divided into pieces and soaked in water of spring or dewwater or well water according to the quality of the body part where resting color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May Ypocras does not prescribe a remedy that is placed on the limbs affected beyond restoration, but rather medicines made of wax and oil, nor any other cause; he recommends travel between coarseness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May Gualia have seen that there are pauses on the broken part of them for their restoration and due to causes where exsiccation is recommended with hot wine, seeds, and similar substances from these causes as advised by him.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Medical tape that soothes injury and pain: made from the skin of boars or hogs' bristles, partridge feathers, hairs, salted parts; crumbled into small pieces and powder, finely ground together as a dressing; this is their remedy. 
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	When the quantity according to which you break down and separate it is considered, if there isn'thy pain or bleeding nor bone fracture at their place, then do not leave them for days without care.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	If you feel severe pain or pressure in the location, then press it down at that moment and apply a plaster from him/her.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And return that subtle rigidity and minor plaster back to the cavity where it was first contracted by your initial compression, gently in place of what is inside so as to restore its health.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	If at times the abscess and swelling and pain and inflammation are all around him, along with indigestion requiring enema and chest tightness necessitating stretching, then repeat that treatment which you have previously given to the patient face-to-face.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	If there is no injury to any of those causes mentioned, then wait three to four or seven days (or more), and some healing will occur within that time frame according to what has been stated; as the fracture becomes immobilized by the coagulation of the flesh over it. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And adjusts within the tightness as much as in your primary constriction entirely, and fasten it into the belly of what is from the sick person'dictum to remember (after reflection on their condition).
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you find the fracture location and it dries out or becomes weary at all times mayhaps, know that nourishment is forbidden to prevent reaching this; therefore provide such sustenance only for three days until a slight swelling appears, and then apply pressure with your hand throughout these days. 
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	May those who restore the fracture of another limb patient not yet healed at meal time do so according to their ability and deformity, as per their operation; a great fear ensues, and if they were right-turned (tortured or twisted) by liquor (humors), it would expand the Ancients freely in that state.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	Here is a line-by-line translation of the medieval medical treatise into English:
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Capital second: When a bone is broken in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The bones are broken pieces, and their forms vary greatly, the causes of which differ from those causing breaks in any part through impact with space, whereby it enters into the cranium (skull), thus affecting both sides like a sword thrust within the trunk; when an opening is made by you inside the skull itself or due to forceful blows on bone and flesh which does not pass beyond the back of the head, this type of breakage is called 'lifting out'.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This crack or perforation that has already been applied to the periosteum (the layer surrounding bone) and is pressing on it; or it' extruding from the bone, which are these very fragments of a fracture or piece of foreign material.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And when it is about a bone breakage in the subtlety of fine hair and for this reason we do not name this particular kind of small vessel fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	Here comes the source sentence to translate:
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	Mostly it hurts in the bones of the joints when they are covered with phlegm (or effluvium), thus:
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	So for all these cracked bones, they are bound together with splints like separate planks.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	When all of this humidity arrives at its place in your body,
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And with all these remedies for detection and inquiry into their attempted escapes and corrupted flesh that is on them,
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	A special vein is known because it has been discovered on the bone and kept away from there until breakage appears black (suggesting a healing stage where bruising or discoloration occurs due to injury).
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	When treating fractures consider the maladies of humours, and if through these accidents there is also manifestation of pain like vomiting from cholera, distension, loss of understanding, abscesses, syncopes, acute fever, treatment of their pains and requests, and likeness to those accidents in major dispositions, they do not heal.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	If an accident of misaligned body occurs, then you begin its healing.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is that pus has entered your body during meals and at nighttime; hence you should study the condition of the bone in the morning throughout the entire day.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	If it is in the summer days, then cover your eyes or face them downward towards the seventh day, as this causes humoral decay of the pancreas and brings on occurrences that have been previously recommended to you.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	If the fracture has already reached the brain covering (the dura mater), and it is broken into small pieces and crushed together, then you must as per your recommendation.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	When you raise the head of the patient suffering from malady and discover it over their shoulder bone according to customary practice (and possibly by your own observation), they will be relieved concerning the malady.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	If you feel pain in your bone for detection of the sickness stone or putrefaction spot (gout), immediately cease what is within it that contains water, and place moistened linens stuffed with herbs around where there are pus-filled areas to allow resting. You must start from above the joint area and inward cutting:
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And it is one of two methods for operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one of the reasons is that you insert an instrument into the wound such as this, and here it is how they manage it: Administer another similar slender tool no more than a few lengths from the first. This is how they handle it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	E assigns medication if necessary by those incisions that were previously made for the second time.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Wherever you find various instruments that have been placed by others and furthermore those made of iron or steel are at the endurance limit of their limbs' extremities; they belong to them as tools.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	Using them for gentle touching over the joints, in order that they do not hit their head and lead this one along.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bone is strong and hard, then when you pierce through its course before administering the incisions at the tables (the platforms where procedures are carried out), these instruments do not penetrate deeply.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	Not so it is named weakness, but these are what pause the bone of the foot at its joint with water that has entered into it; for there they make a round extreme part or margin on top where it seems like thresholds (hips), which prevents being submerged and passing through the hard parts of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is convenient that you grasp these many ladders of which each one corresponds to the sharpness of any bone in your body, provided it's present at all parts of the brain and its quantity vardict both long and short according to the sharpness of this very part.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the form of three kinds of treatments: The quality that penetrates through the broken bone and stops at the place where you know the bone has been pierced; then it redirects the treatment to another location, pausing until there'se no longer any disruption in the size of the tumor or its environment.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	When you take care with complete caution that the incision does not touch any cause of chicanery,
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	When the bone traverses through it and if separation continues at this place in time, extract that which comes out, for then these humors enter with great intensity into the joint of water within the bone, like knives cutting others seemingly inscribed ones; but when pushed downward both vertically (pus teon) and subtly (pus subtil), they can still affect other inscribed lines.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	If there is any loose or broken part of the bones, then take that which will be most convenient for you to remove them from their joints; and treat with vinegar and oils those things we have mentioned hereinabove.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other aspect of operation is fearlessness and great concern, as Gualius and Lause speak highly; this concerns you when it becomes necessary for your participation in uncovering the broken bone part within which fracture was forcefully inserted, stopping at that moment where upon having discovered said breakage with gentle hands taking possession of its form —
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And since the lunate fragment is like a lion and has no cause, its sharp edge cuts two times forward in length before stopping; thus, the lunate fragment should be adjusted where it meets the incised acute fragment within the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	Here comes the sentence to translate:
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When there is any additional cause related to the patient' extrinsic bone in their joints (the location of which), insert that piece into its extremity at the cutting point made by yours truly; and once it has been inserted, remove your hand from this area as it causes harm and fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the bone does not penetrate into the periosteum, and where it has broken or detached is its facies (the outer surface of the bone), there will be roughness and small nodules present; cover that roughness with various quantities you have prepared according to their size for administers at any convenient location on them and place rightly after each stage of your operation how it has broken or detached, using different amounts as necessary throughout.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	May there be any small breaks in the vessels or subtle fractures that require you to administer care according to what has been lost for correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	It is because not all have been studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	Stepping over what we have shown in large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	If the pancreas is inflamed when you remove the bone, then take two or three layers of cloth as much as there's dirt in it; immerse that layer under the mud until saturated and place it over where the body was removed from, so no feces cling to it. Then put another doubled or triple-layered piece of fabric into water mixed with oil (rosary), submerge this one as well, placing it on top of the first layer while keeping wet; apply that same cloth directly onto what you have treated thereon and only tighten it so much until your fingers are covered by how much mud is present. Then administer treatment over these linens without stretching them out further than necessary based on how dirty the patient's body was found to be in this area.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	Here comes the first source sentence: "E es que tu fasses de aquestes medicinas polverizada que sia pulverizada sobre la tierra, assi quando están secas; universalmente administres en aquella toda esa medicación de propiedad por la cual se abstiene y no mordique.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Here comes the translated text line by line:
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	When pain enters the chest cavity as it is opened and manipulated during treatment, and there are accidents that have happened to him; therefore consider whether he has suffered all of his parts completely.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If you do not cure the pain but with medicine that is applied below it and where this pain occurs, then take honey and oil in parts three, apply them to these lines on a cloth, place it over there; also cover that area above the navel so that he takes those spices for which healing has been agreed upon that will make him healthy.
Capitol .iii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any textual
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	When the nose is broken, or fractured as in this case ("trincat"), immediate medical attention should be sought for
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that it'se not broken nose but fractured nasal bones – these are the splintered pieces often referred to in medical terms, and there aren't two separate bones here; instead we have a single piece of cartilage (nasal septum), which isn’t actually cracked or shattered. Rather, it has been deformed into an odd twisted shape due to trauma ("sinuitat").
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	May it happen that one of the bones in his body is broken and you insert a small object into your nose to splint the fracture at this joint outdosetup hereby returning their nostribus according to their natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And if it is for your ease (to alleviate pain), be careful not to harm the patient'thy thigh during that operation on their hernia.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the upper chest part divided from nose to tailbone and it does not move towards that place, then cut a piece of bone equal to the extent of the broken body therein where it has been injured.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the fracture is in two parts, then make it seem as if this (the treatment).
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	When the hernia remains restorative on the first day of rupture, if so is possible; otherwise, apply Le VII or LX days' rest for recovery from anaphylactic shock (cautious pause).
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause is not necessary for you; if you wish so, then do this, and if you also want to apply heat, then proceed with that as well.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	If you have poulticed another open sore with wax or boiled oil and vinegar (or honey), apply it to the nose or ears that are inflamed; this may also be done using a sponge soaked in these substances, which helps alleviate discomfort.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	May it not be that if you do not apply poultice correctly, the wound may swell with flour and bran mixed with honey on bread crumbs; place your hand over this spot without any reason or cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	May if the bones of the nose are slightly fractured or displaced, then you must cut above those areas with instruments that I have designated for them; and set the fracture itself, applying what carries life within it to consolidate and provide appropriate supports as necessary.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If you crush a worm inside the nose, then treat it with that medicine and introduce iron rods through which to ensure its total healing.
Capitol .iiii.	In order to provide an accurate translation of "Capitol .iiii.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	The phrase translates into English as follows:
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone is broken and not merely cracked (not yet crushed into pieces), but if it' extruding outwards to joints without being completely shattered or deformed curving towards parts, then its recognition should be easy for you.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the jawbone has already been broken into two pieces, then you must administer extension of parts so that it may be possible for its function (equilibrium or balance).
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If you have constricted the mouth due to pain and fear that teeth might break through the silver or gold filament (filling), then place pressure on the broken jawbone, as well as over the doubled cloth drape covering it; a single strand of thread sufficient in length for the span of the fractured jaw is used. This ensures its application when dressed and that it does not get destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the humors that they should rest and calm down, stopping the food from being absorbed by their marrow bones (or liver).
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If the figure is distorted in any manner, then you should tighten your belt and correct that which has already been altered today; apply what has already changed from its place on or within it (which could mean body parts), placing this atop a pillow of wool, linen, or cornmeal flour. Here is the translation:
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when that bandage is placed and positioned on him/her, the bone'dict not alter its disposition—so long as healing occurs steadily for three days straight without interruption or additional injury to it; such frequent monitoring ensures proper recovery of the fracture.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If another ulceration occurs as a result of wound care, then apply what we have mentioned for healing this condition within the skin layer where it has formed and treat that ulceration thusly.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is in bone (plagua), consider whether it has separated the bone or if they are displaced, then adjust those fragments to where water flows towards them within the room of that which supports their joints.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the poultice of the patient is dispersed, then apply it more according to the amount you need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	When you have removed those satagias (likely referring to the cushions previously placed), and there is no more discharge remaining from them, then cover it with soil if it' extraneous; otherwise, place your hand over that part which has been designated for this purpose in these instruments, until healed.
Capitol .v.	Capital (assuming "Capitol" is either an abbre
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	When you crack your collarbone, or clavicle, it's often due to a fracture which can happen from falls, impacts during sports,
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	When moving excessively or improperly during physical activity, the collarbone is broken—this type of break can occur due to overextension that strains one's shoulder muscles (pectoral and deltoid). This fracture typically falls into three categories: simple/closed with no displacement where bones are still in their proper place; compound or open, which involves a cracked skin above the injury site leading possibly to an
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When the collarbone is broken and separated into two parts that cannot be repaified together—this represents an unhealable or irreparable break, which often implies a very poor prognosis for natural healing; it may require surgical intervention (repair in this case) at specialized facilities. If the fracture is complex and displaced, with parts of bone being out of alignment—this makes non-surgical restoration challenging as precise realignment would be necessary to ensure proper healing; such cases often necessitate surgery for corrective measures or internal fixation devices (like plates and screws). When the break is open, where there's a fracture line through skin—this indicates that not only has bone broken but also formed an external wound. Such injuries need immediate medical
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	In cases where the break is compound—meaning there's an open fracture with bone fragments visible outside due to a wound in or around it; immediate surgery becomes necessary because of two reasons: first, one hand has to take on the role as advisor and stabilizer for the broken collarbone (holding up what was injured), while another could potentially provide external support like splints at this site. However, such a situation would almost always require professional medical attention immediately due to risks of infection and proper bone healing being much more complex than simpler fractures where immobilization might suffice for recovery without the need for surgical inter
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Return the broken bone within that it should take its form according to how much is left of it and ensure there's not too little or excess curvature in it.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If indigestion persists for extended periods, then cease stimulation of the abdomen with a cloth or wool garment as needed according to your requirement; extend and lift the chest, compressing it within where you hold until relief is felt from bloating (expansion).
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you cannot draw the arm' extrinsic part to the parts outside, then it comes down into the thorax; and as for the malady, it rises over the chest bone, and places a limb-like swelling on one of its muscles in great size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When the minister presses on the muscle of him at the joints entering once the bone in his shoulder blade is elevated above its place, and then he corrects the fracture using those tools therein provided.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel pressure in the shoulder blade and chest area, it is time to cut into that place and remove those pains easily.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If it is retained in the bone, then you will ingeniously make an incision at one of those which have been prepared for this purpose, placing a pause behind the sternum'supinant muscle that serves as its anchor; and these are made from either wood or iron: here lies their form.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It appears that the text is written in an archaic form of Latin influenced by other Romance languages such as Italian and Spanish. Here's a line-by-line translation into modern English:
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	May the length of time be as much as you can for the operation; that there are enough limbs available, one is wide and another tightly stretched.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	If the disruption of the flesh you have inscribed when extracting the bone is secure with an application of caution (indicating that some form of wound care has been applied), then adjust your lips to stitch up the flesh again.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the rupture is small or you fear an abscess that needs to be opened with a sharp tool according to the quantity of the wound'dict, then apply dressings and pills following their respective quantities as needed on the patient's body parts where there are lacerations.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If you apply a caustic and have it wet with vinegar (and water), place your hand over that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	May the bone when it is cracked and its section affected be that a plaster made of flour mixed with egg white stops atop the splint formed from lynx hide or similar material; this creates three-inch lengths in long form, which are then placed on top of each other over the location of the fracture using cloth. Additionally:
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	Here it all is so that the jaw is not grumpy over broken bones; and when you see the swelling of any joint daily, when the ligament softens or becomes moistened, then correct your diet and strengthen your limbs.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Return the patient' extramedullary sleep on their chest to the thoracic column of them, and quickly titillate that area so they can sleep there at night within a small pillow; thus his helper will be elevated with him above it all, raising the fractured clavicle onto muscle lifting or bringing up the arm by its shoulder.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	Even if you do not tighten the bandage unless inflammation or suppuration occurs in the area within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And if you have seen his face turned toward water, adjust the plaster in its tightness and restore what has been broken so that it is healed and clotted (the fracture of the collarbone).
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	It is stiff and compressed as per the month in twenty-eight days, and some discomfort occurs among those living at home during that time period.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol VI. (The Roman numeral "VI" indicates
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	From restoration of a shoulder fracture, translated line by line:
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	Spatula is broken at its location in him and not within it, but rather on its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when the place of him — and it is broken in the warmth location of his body—only through touch can he be known, according to how much damage there has been done naturally; this prepares you for treatment so that everything may happen as efficiently as within your power.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Here comes the first source sentence: Return your pause over the golden moly and stop it with lead, as well as a double layer of cloth padding; place this on top of the slender table stone according to the quantity that the entire spatula holds or perhaps just one scoop.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the stone has become concave at some points on the blade'dictor (scalpel), then you grip that indentation with your thumb and index finger to flatten it out, ensuring that each part of the scalpel is equally flat afterwards.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Return strength from below upwards, away from the body's contraction and stone of the pillar within where it is not weakened by its location.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the ligament each day; and every time it is softened, apply another treatment to it, stretching the leg if its place has swolthy or puffed up in that spot.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	E gräwsle the patient'suponance upon his flesh.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The text translates as follows in English line by line:
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	So when this number is completed, you will break the ligament, and be sure that it's not feared by or from those bones which I started with initially.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	If you proceed to the place of the shoulder and hip bones, then divide over there, and stop it immediately; as soon as we have discussed in the case of fractured clavicle due to osteomyelitis sequestration, perform cautery if necessary here.
Capitol .vii.	Certainly! Here is the translation of each line from Latin-like medieval
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	In English, this translates to "The treatment for a bone break.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The joints sometimes break at this warm place on him, and his limbs may be twisted there due to being turned or compressed.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	When accidents happen and the patient's bone is broken (the fracture), it leads to divisions in parts, pain intensifying upon movement of that body part; resulting coughing, choking, difficulty breathing, heavy sensation in head – these symptoms are declared openly when examining the affected area wherein the bone has been fractured and is visible (not hidden) within the patient'se feelings.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	Here comes the translation:
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence:  
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If it is necessary to provoke the dislodgment of that which has been corrupted or formed within, causing pain at this location, then use your cautery and correct what causes the suffering through its application; apply reductio if you see facial involvement; adjust accordingly so as to heal whatever restriction exists therein.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.: (The translation of this line is unclear without
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	It appears that you've provided a phrase in Spanish, which translates to "The restoration of the coasts when they are broken." Here
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	The provided Spanish sentence appears to discuss the principles of addressing coastal fractures, suggesting that:
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	Upon learning of him/her not being bewitched by his/her own inquiry, I understand that he/she may be concerned about what they are discovering themselves.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	E the restoration is to be done as best possible according to ability, inside until it has healed completely and then cast or splint the broken bone if necessary from that point onward.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the fracture of the backbone is declining into parts, then it causes severe pain and piercing sensations, similar to when one cries (indicating distress), and for this reason you must put on a shirt; there will be difficulty in breathing, cough, hoarseness, vomiting with motion sickness-like symptoms. This is difficult treatment.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the Ancients have engineered this matter well in advance.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "As they say that by pausing foods from Mael (the uterus), which bring inflammation and movement within it, their stomach will swell and expand, leading to fractures being propelled out.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	May we consume water to ensure it is not the cause of generating arterial calcification if you do not suffer from gout pain; and if already suffering, here too helps with consuming water.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E disseran aqueles loues desuso e apropos quem súcciam fortitudo; és se parella a razonamiento, pero temen que o ventoza tire as superfluidades ao lugar por causa da debilidade.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And they said unto them: cover that place where wax has already been submerged in oil, and leave small pauses between their backs while it is filled again; then treat the gout with care for pleurisy of meat and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	If the groin strongly contracts without suffering and pinches it with a padded needle pricked through clothing, fear over the groin occurs; when they fracture open this location, revealing the broken bone beneath, then pause therewith that instrument which maintains the splint used previously, recalling its purpose to facilitate hand movement and extract what is stuck.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	1. Aproach we shall align the patient'thy lips if great, with care, and heal that which is placed within so it may recover fully.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If you have an ulcerated wound (decidua apesta), then apply pressure with pulverized olive oil and rest over the location so that it heals with the water applied to treat the abscessed area.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	When it is placed upon its belly onto the bed for healing purposes (while resting), then it will become healthy/recovered.
Capitol .ix.	Since "Capitol" doesn'se directly relate or provide enough
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	The phrase you provided, "Restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col," is in Latin with some regional language influences (possibly Italian or
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Translation: "Some weeks after the vertebrae of the thoracic (chest) and cervical (neck) bones have been fractured, and they seem to mimic those of the backbone."  
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	When you have caused the humors to flow into the armpits and veins so that they can be assessed if it will heal or not, consider that if your hands are already softened and stupefied/dead and cannot cure those nor extend them when constricted in these joints with a needle, you understand that it is not going to heal. In the matters of dispositions, this is mortally fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	If that which is malady in those and causes pain therein are the bones of the skull and piercing (i.soft or sharp objects), then you should understand that the brain's marrow will be saved, and these humors shall guard it for cure.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	If you see how his backbones look like water and wish to know if they are healed or not, then pay attention to the patient's feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you find yourself already soothinged (mollified), apply those waters to the most affected areas on your body, and when they touch their upper backs where you lie down, induce sighing and evacuation of bowels as per one'se desires; some may even recline over their backs for urination without control. Be aware that such a state is mortal, hence not suitable for treatment here (in this context).
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	May it not happen that any cause of those things exists; if so, then a more serious and painful condition arises.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And for its treatment is that you perform ablations of the applied cauterization covering either the fractured spine or ossified hernia, and rest upon it for some hours until the cauterization settles.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And when one of the cushions for comfort and existence is present, resting upon that which holds it together; command the humors to take a break and maintain calmness so as not to sleep on the part where pain resides while being healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If you have fractured the bone of the skull or any cause that has already separated it from its place, then clamp over the skull'dict and press on that bone; adjust the lips of the wound if large, suture them if necessary; take care of the flesh around those bandages until healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the bone of the hip is broken and it'dict that there may be blood from the wound on your left side under you in the belly; and wherein to stop bleeding afterward if necessary using these means (if unable), apply pressure above with bandage or pad, as required hereafter:
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel splinters in it (the body), touch that place and apply pressure therein; take care of the foreign matter as directed by proper treatment until healed within which time has passed since being treated initially.
Capitol .x.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide context or additional
De restauracio de la ancha.	The provided text appears to be a fragment of another language, possibly Latin-influenced with Rom
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the limbs are broken and if they break, their fracture is not just a communication in those extremities; it descends to the parts where these fragments lie—longitudinally and downward along divisions within them—and suffering ensues at that site. The cushion becomes astonished when there's a fracture.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The restoration of him is that you spread your hand over where there is a figure representing his breakage.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the bone is broken in only one limb of you, then take that second part and enclose it within your body until it has been shaped to its natural form again by means of horseback riding (hippiatrics).
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	May it be that the fracture is long or already declining into parts as soon as your belly (inside) has been prepared for its restoration/healing process.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have applied the plaster to it, pause over that beam of wood or bone where there is not supposed to be any risk of a crack forming nor removal of the spine (implant).
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And command the hump that fills with fluid there such as it is in proportion to that which constricts, and order the patient'thy bowels or chest (depending on their condition), lying upon his back or side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If you apply an incision cutting instrument (cautery), then cease stretching out of it and its restoration will begin until such time that the cut has been sated by said tool, at which point return to the patient'thy recovery site; afterward reapply strength through massage.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If you crush in the bones or they are fractured, then treat them accordingly.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi.: (The specific meaning of this line is
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	In translating "Restauraci della frattura dell'adjuvo," we can interpret the sentence as referring to the healing or
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The translation of this line seems slightly unclear due to potential errors in transcription, but it could be interpreted as: "Adjutori which is between the shoulders within the head." However, given that 'adjutori' historically refers to
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	If it is broken, the restoration of such an object involves two kinds of tools; among these are those you must grasp firmly with your left hand as they typically guide movement in this manner according to its form. Here's a clearer translation into English for context and understanding: "In case something breaks," said healing process includes using different types of instruments, specifically one that should be held tightly by the patient’s left hand because it usually directs motion following their specific shape or design.
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	The translated English version would be: "They are two ropes tied at the ends," and they should hang from an elevated place (presumably for some form of treatment or mechanical purpose). Here's what this line suggests when fully understood in context, as provided by your original text snippet:
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Continuing from the provided context, this line translates into English as: "Follow the humoral path along a section; and lift your broken arm over which it enters through where its rod meets here," indicating that one must maintain awareness of certain bodily fluids or energies (humors) in motion. The individual is instructed to raise their injured limb above something—possibly an instrument such as the treatment device mentioned previously, around whose joints these humoral currents enter at a specific point where it connects with another component like its own metal rod ("fust"). Here's
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other symptom is that the womb rises above the pelvic bone and suspends its position at the neck of the uterus; two ministers take hold with their tongues over the fracture on her body, another holds just below it, stretching out as needed.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	If you want the extension to be strong, then hold it firmly on the fracture and that other ligament, so that both of their limbs stretch outwards.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is near the limb'dictor joint, then let one stop the ligament on top of it and another immediately address the fracture itself with care for the hernia (the affected area).
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	If it is believed that there is a break in the knee joint, then have it bound tightly on that spot and over that knee.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Enguala that which facilitates and strengthens it, and apply as much of it each time after covering when applied for good reasons; thus hardening that which has not been afflicted with osteomyelitis.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	May you cauterize the ulcerated area if possible within seven days and secure it with fine wool thread soaked in wine vinegar for five more days before resting again to allow healing of the cauterized lesion, whereby your strength will be maintained.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And when the splint that stops the fracture is applied, and wrapping of cloth around it as well; place your arm over this assistant, holding their hand on top of its muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Pause the drape and strength over the assistant' extrinsic arm to keep it in place of braces if any cause prevents bone fracture (translation interpretation: "Hold back the cloth and firmly support your arms, especially for those assisting externally; ensure their position is secure unless some reason could potentially lead to a breakage in the bones").
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And when they use tweezers.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation: "And when that stone placed there has been laid down and set firmly by others' stones; a pause is made between each such stone, according to their joint length as per the addition of three fingers from all parts.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Return strength over the bones at which I have mentioned as constricted, during our consultation in the hall of assembly (or council chamber).
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	When your tightness at the site of the fracture is put straightened out.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	When I have lengthened the fracture or lesser constriction.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And if you see the situation of the stones and narrowing as we have discussed in this hour for restoring the limb to its state, then do so accordingly.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	If you fear scalding with caustic, then apply the constriction and stones within a day seven days after we have spoken about it.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that it does not occur at the entrance or inflammation, and food is forbidden as per its disposition of superfluous tightness; therefore correct everything according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	May you not find any cause for the current discomfort on examination today; if so, do not release (the ligature) until three days at most or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let his abdomen rest on his backs, and their hands above their belly, holding it.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	Pause over the helper who is cooking with wool thread in hand, and consider at all times of day or night whether the figure of the broken limb has not been dissolved nor dispersed by the softening agent; then correct what you must according to your plan.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	E pause the food of the malady according to the order we have now, so that the food is subtle in consumption within what has been consumed for dinner; and when heavy food comes from him/her.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	According to custom, they are strong in forty days; and when weakened, baths and ointments made of these that repair it are given therein.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	If the bone is cracked and irritated, do not remove that piece of bandage or splint for days or up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol .xii. (The text does not provide additional context for
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	La recuperación de la fractura de brazo." In English, this translates to the recovery from a
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The recovery of a broken arm is composed of two bones which are called foces; from these the smaller one supports and sustains (or "pausats") what we commonly refer to as the fingerbone or digitulum, while the larger focus forms part of its origin. In modern English translation:  
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And when either the great fire or small is broken only once and their pieces (the fractured parts), it happens at times by chance.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	When the small fire undernethy falls apart, then it is restored quickly and healing for him comes easily.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	When the patient's fire (body heat or vital energy) is extingdict too quickly and a break in the body occurs, then healing of that injury becomes difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	When that thorn was there from where two bones could have been broken.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that has broken is the small one above (presumably referring to a specific part of the skeleton), it is convenient for the doctor; you must restore this bone so briefly that ease can be felt within while waiting until such time as he becomes mobile.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	May it be that if there is a large fire (possibly indicating severe pain or inflammation), then the cover has been stretched out forcefully by you.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	If the two fires are joined together, then when you pause the extraction process, press firmly with force.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	When the figure of the hand must be stretched over a cushion, and its pulse at the extremities is placed below them, as well as all others are put herein, and the malady'sin center upon an inverted basin:
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	When a hernia is present under or behind him now, in order that the humors may not worsen.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	When the minister extends the arm of participation above or below their shoulder (or as if they are holding a lasso), another minister does so from above likewise.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Return the doctor bends down to insert his hand into where it can relieve that particular part, according to its best form he knows how.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	If in the treatment of bone fracture you perform a full reduction at its place with your own virtue, then pain will be relieved entirely from that spot by your action.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	If in you there appears separate sorrows that pierce the spine and are not within your hope for restoration, then upon it apply what we have mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	May it be that if the bone is green (rotting or decayed), you have felt pain in one place at a time (singularly pinpointed location of injury), and therefore take on its care.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If you harden the cautery applied to your patient' extrication site, then lay linen soaked in olive oil and white wax over that rigidity until it subsides; afterward remove the wax and apply an emplastrum prepared with talcum powder made of clay. Place a pause on top where you previously applied cautery (and pressure), restoring what was fractured, placing pad as needed:
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you know that the name of the bones in the arm is found within its major arrangements or a fracture occurs at one or two points simultaneously.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Here is the line-by extralinguistic translation of this medieval medical treatise:
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the body part in its freshly cleansed state today (emphasis placed upon keeping it clean and well-maintained).
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	If you have any cause that requires correction in the member, and as soon as you apply pressure to where it hurts (presumably a specific location on the body), hold until the discomfort subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let it stay within while taking rest, and return its constriction.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If extraction has been softened and the bone seems to have returned to those states, then you must correct all of it with your intervention.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Consider if nourishment is prohibited for excessive strain on the limb; provided that you soften it slightly each day until reaching the required sustenance, and strengthen it at once.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If there is no cause for the ones mentioned in those things within you at the malaute (which could refer to discomgy or bloating), do not remove anything from your body and send it away every ten days, or among others whom have been sent by these things.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And elevate its leg from the womb due to its active motion and let it sleep on their backs.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	You understand that this fracture will be healed in either xxx days or xxxii days, and all of this depends on the complexity of the injuries and the disposition of the humors within the body.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol III.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of bone fracture repair of finger joints and fingers' ends.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You understand that with this tool (presumably some form of cautery or medical instrument), and not causing harm to them, you regularly guide the patient's movement towards healing after fractures involving bone ends and joint dislocations between marrow space and navel umbilicus.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	When the wound or fracture occurs on your body, then watch how much time has passed since it happened (usually counted as ten units of equality), and place your hand over that extended part to prevent further bleeding.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Extend the minister'se (physician) fingers into those broken together for good joining/repairing.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And when applying plaster and bandage without causing an abscess to form, place the padding according to the amount of space needed on top (or below), which you have already covered with a cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	May the joint injury be in the parts of dislocation and appears like drape fabrication, then order the malady to tighten that area with its hand (or humoral substance), making it long as the cloth drawn by hands; command that firmness also on the drap.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And if it is necessary for the body's vessel to be on a cloth wherein it rises, then tighten that second one which covers it.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in parts outside, then cease pressure from above and below stones of that part taken into your palm, so that it becomes healed and three times; also halt swelling, as when you rotate your hand between these fingers (thumbs).
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If you have broken one of the kneecaps and it is your thigh bone (femur), then splint it according to how far cracked, using a small stick from its palm as support if you wish, pause for three days so that the fracture does not become misaligned.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	May it be so that if the fracture is in those areas as well (the hip joint), or at this place (location), or in the earlobe, or on the ankle ring; and they are all located therein continuously, which one of these three places belongs to where you touched initially; take hold with that finger upon it. Or if resting above such small stone pillar as we have found here among our feet (indicative of a bunion), do so similarly while holding their hands.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	Consider when restoring, and apply that which is cast for the purpose of apostemy caution—that which comes into use when you encounter any cause related to those described in his accounting.
Capitol .xiv.	Capitol .xiv.: This line appears to be referencing a specific
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	In reference to "Restauration of the hip bone fracture." (Note: The phrase seems incomplete and might actually refer to an instruction or step in a medical procedure
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The hip bone is fractured according to the feeling, which has been transformed into dislocation and must be treated with urgent surgical intervention (literal translation). The sentence suggests that upon examination of pain in or near the groin area—a common location for both femoral neck and acetabular hip fractures—medical professionals have determined a serious bone injury requiring immediate attention, possibly including realignment ('convertit to
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	For the restoration of life (rehabilitation), a wire is stretched across the fracture site and another at once over it; meanwhile, pressure on the patient' extraneous organs such as intestines may be applied to their abdomen or chest. This line indicates that part of the treatment procedure involves using wires for stabilizing bone fragments post-fracture (possibly in an external fixation device), while simultaneously applying manual compression, likely externally too, on certain organs as a way to reduce internal bleeding and further injury within those areas during
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And the surgeon extends the wire across its entire length as per where it lies within the bone when broken (during surgical repair). Here, 'liament' refers to a type of wired internal fixation device used in orthopedic surgery for stabilizing fractured bones. The sentence implies that during the actual operation or post-oper
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	And if it is necessary to reduce the hip bone (i.e., set back or realign), then one wire may be applied along its junction with the femoral head/neck for extension within that joint, and another immediately over the site of breakage; this maintains compression on those areas as needed during surgical intervention ('extention'). This indicates a specific orthopedic technique whereby wires are used to secure bone fragments near their anatomical junction with other skeletal structures for optimal healing. The use here suggests that such internal fixation is crucial when dealing with complex fractures involving the hip joint
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	When the joint is susceptible to inflammation (denolh), it will be bound with linen and its extension applied to the parts immediately.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	May you alleviate the ulcer in three days until it heals itself with medication (l'apostema), and return to your care afterwards.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The stiffness of it is painful: the hard bandage covers the fracture, and folds twice or thrice, reducing excess; properly wrap around where it reaches to the ankle and kneecap joints.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	Here insert a long thread between the thigh and leg of the body at the parts above as needed, taking care to bring down any excess from the bandage on those limbs' extremities where it touches them with their fingers; then rotate around the thigh and leg area using that which remains superfluous.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Return your position over that bone at the location of that fracture and place one pillow on top of their kneebone area from where those stones are situated.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Return and fill the hollows between the sheet and thigh with molasses, in order that its extraction be stopped.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Here begins the contraction of a firm part under the location of the fracture in three or four layers, and as you move away from the site of the fracture, your tightness decreases, and thus apply lubrication more gently.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Return the structure to that place so it does not injure the corroding or setting member nor apply cautery or inflammation; if you do harm to any cause of those things, then touch yourself here for healing as directed above.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If bone pain is felt in the bone that was set by you, then immediately engage with what can be done at your disposal; and if not possible, press on it again and cure whatever has preceded such remembrance until healing occurs within this time frame.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And when some measures are applied to this hip joint crack besides being adjusted with the skeleton as mentioned earlier in our assistance and on the arm, here it comes:
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	Even if the patient' extrication occurs during restoration in such a way that it does not worsen their leg immobility; and if after being restored alone, another cushion is applied thereon, then mobility of the affected limb must be maintained.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	Be aware that the thigh is rigid in forty days or a few months, and all this depends on the variety of complexions and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	The text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discuss
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	In the context of treating a dislocated shoulder (in Spanish, "rondel" is often used informally to refer to one's arm or joint), the provided text seems
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	The given medieval Latin-influenced Spanish sentence roughly translates to: "Knowing that the dislocation of the shoulder joint requires careful reduction," it may be necessary to apply gentle manipulations or adjustments (in modern terms, this could refer to a closed reduction procedure where no surgery is needed). The reference here appears to concern orthopedic treatment for
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	In cases where you must reduce (or realign) a bone fracture or dislocation ("fissura" for break and "trauc," likely derived from Latin roots meaning 'disruption'), it is only the hand of one person, possibly an apprentice ('plaga' can mean novice), who has authority over these actions. Herein lies everything related to medical care—the clinician’s touch or hands ("sentiment"). This line suggests a historical context where manual skill and personal involvement by health
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of the fractured body parts within these limits must be executed by a skilled hand that has been broken or separated—which implies injury to one's own hands (perhaps reflecting on self-inflicted injuries). It should only happen as allowed for effective treatment and ease, facilitating both healing ('agreguat') and manufacturing of necessary items. This sentence underscores the importance not just in medical skill but also craftsmanship during historical times when surgical interventions were limited compared to today's standards—emphasizing rehabilitation with
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	After applying the poultice and placing it over that round stone (possibly referring to a heating device used for therapeutic warmth), if needed, adjust its position towards where you desire—seeking comfort or relief from constriction ('convenient'). This line outlines an old practice of using heat as part of the treatment and highlights patient-centric care by considering their need (preference) for certain therapy positions
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol .xvi. (This line appears as a title or reference
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Restauration of the patella fracture." This sentence is in Latin, and it refers to medical treatment aimed at repairing a
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You understand that in the patella there are two bones by which it is called: one large and known as the kneecap (patella), and the other small and named calf." This translation from Latin to English reflects an explanation of the structure of the patella, indicating its composition with a larger central part referred to simply as "the big" or prominent bone in this context. The smaller component is described metap0merically using terms like 'subtle' and specifically named 'c
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And you grind away at the bones of your arm with these waters that cause pain for both; thus restoration is performed upon it as on the entire arm itself, and this operation belongs to him." In English translation: This line discusses a healing process where certain "bracing substances," likely some form of medieval medicinal poultice or treatment involving water application used by an unspecified practitioner (referred to here with masculine pronouns), is applied to the bones in one'se arm. The line suggests that this method would restore not just a specific area but also treatment as comprehensive
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If you split two bones together, the kneecap becomes all parts." This sentence in English indicates that if someone were to fracture or break both elements of the patella (typically referring to its articular surfaces which come into contact with other joint
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	If you split the small bone underneath, the kneecap is converted to parts named Dennant." Here's an English translation of this line: It appears that in medieval medical practice there was recognition and terminology for different components within joint structures such as
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	If your bone is fractured and you apply pressure immediately, it's due to causes beyond your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Accordingly apply pressure and massage of the joints as directed by that methodology.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	Whenever there is a crack in the thighbone and it has been subjected to severe blows causing extension of fracture, apply pressure with your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	When there is any cause for operation on the arms, and when you clamp down with tongs completing all of the surgery, then take hickory stakes that have been paused just before their causes in solitude (the sun'dict), which are used as pins or splints; apply these to those joints where there is growth/swelling, and they should not be made from fingers. The length according to the elbow of them accordingly, and insert into the body immediately after taking out some of that pressure just like with heat removal by sweating (i.e., evaporation).
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Wrap a covering over each garment according to the length of it, and pause one at the junction of one cushion and the other, ensuring that they are within the purulent area of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Return the limbs' pains to three locations of pain and at nighttime, this position is forbidden for lying on either right or left side; it serves well as such.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a bolt of wood is administered according to the length of the couch, and it's positioned on the couch so that it maintains its mobility.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Mostly when you have caused fluid in a fracture and it is gathered properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol .xvii. (The specific meaning of "Capitol
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	From the fracture of the ankle and bones in the foot, as well as those around it ("dits"). The phrase suggests that there has been some kind of injury or damage to these
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	From the ankle not all suffer from complete fractures; some bones in the foot may have partial breaks; and those around them hardly break but are instead displaced within their joints ("mes of disposition"). This passage indicates that injuries to these areas can vary, with some resulting only in incomplete fractures while others involve more significant damage where parts become misaligned or dislocated.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	If the bones in your foot break and sometimes those very same bones are raised above each other, then lift up their swollen leg on prepared ground ready for treatment as needed ("an ant"). Here the text advises that if certain fractures cause dislocation or protrusion of broken bone segments beyond one another (a condition known in modern terms as a deformity with displaced fragments), such an injury should be stabilized by elevating and resting it on prepared ground, possibly referring to providing supportive care until proper
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then take care to place one foot over the raised ones (the injured bones), and apply cold or warmth as needed ("calce" - likely meaning something like bandage in modern terminology). Then press, and hold them within their respective places until they are properly positioned. This guidance is aimed at immobilizing a fractured limb temporarily with some form of thermal treatment (cold to reduce swelling or heat for comfort) while maintaining the injured bones' proper
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Return pain relief and halt discharge from under the arm, and place their abdomen in a small trough where there are two cups placed upon it.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Return strength to that part of the body with structure and movement, which you have already covered with cloths and other sources from where they derive hunger.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	When three or four days have passed, then you will loosen the bandage, as if crushing the bones that are bent or displaced, and in those operations your hands shall be used together with needles.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	If your fingers are numb or cold, restore them and warm them up as you feel for it in the restoration process of these digits.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If you have fractured the bones of either two or three joints, then rest on any one part of their body enveloped in a lion-skin garment; stretch the table under the chest, and place yourself upon one of its legs so that the tongue can be kept good.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	It is convenient for you that you do not neglect to consider all the causes mentioned in other accidents we have described here, and so address them as they arise from within us.
Capitol .xviii.	The given medieval medical text appears to be in an archaic form of Romance languages
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	This sentence seems to describe a situation involving bone injuries, likely from Old Italian (which can be considered an archaic form of modern-day Romance languages like Latin). The terms used are reminiscent but not identical to Medieval or Ancient Roman medical terminology
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the woman's hip bone is broken (fractura), it must be laid down flat on its side ('cezera cayrada'), and gently elevated slightly at the midpoint of that line where two parts meet, with support behind her to keep position steady. Here "conh" refers likely to a femur or hip joint ("hip bone"), 'trincat' means broken (fractura), while 'enclina', in this context suggests tilting gently at an angle ('elevada un petit'). The sentence demonstr
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	The matron (nurse or attendant) must place the hip bone of a woman ('la matrona umpla le conh de coto'), and with it, align her thighbone as well; she should also handle any fractured limb carefully by lifting up its small parts progressively until they are fully contained within that position wherein there is hope (with spero). Here "conh" again refers to the hip bone ("femur"), 'ayssi cum' means with it or alongside, and this implies a healing practice aligned by faith ('spera'). The sentence also indicates an approach used before modern medical imaging techniques; handling was delicate (la femna sia concutida), lifting up each part of the broken limb to reposition for better alignment without causing further injury. This suggests a medieval technique where manual manipulation is employed with care, possibly as one component within their
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And let it be for seven days or bring those things in, and that one is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	If you wish, take one time of sheep'dict and tighten it over the patient's abdomen with a reed; insert the bladder entirely into its cavity, then inflate in through the reed so that the bladder is swollen inside the cavity. When this happens, the fracture returns to normal.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	When it is filled with bandages and stays on for two days after being applied, so that it heals.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	When the bones of the knee or thigh are cracked, apply there to restore and massage the fluid we have rubbed into the hip joint.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	When it is not hidden within these proper joints and hardly ever comes back to the same place for which there are studies and uses of my book; this fracture indicates directly in major functions through a straight pathway during restoration and tightness, thus I understand.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	When the wound of the body is opened and grease (likely some form of liniment or dressing) applied to it, place that on the area wrapped in cloth cover; and have it covered for three days or until those sent away are healed.
Capitol .xix.	Capitol .xix. (This line appears incomplete or potentially non-
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	From the healing of bones when one is a child. ("capitolo" likely refers to chapter, and "restauracio de fractura" means treatment or repair
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	Turn to that which accommodates the bone fracture when one is young, and primarily if the broken bone or those of the knee joint (or similar parts) are large in size like your own; otherwise, choose something resembling it where you have cut yourself there. If conditions for cauterization on that body part indicate necessity as mentioned by others present with us today—then perform cautery at once upon this occasion if the circumstances allow.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	If the child falls sick, then you must hold them close to keep warm until signs of illness disappear, unless another cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	When you begin to restore the fracture on that particular day, do not extend it unless there is an ulceration developing.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	May you cauterize the ulcer if so decided, then heal it within one day until when it subsides, and not apply on them for three more days; otherwise, ill consequences may occur.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	May if the bone is broken above the neck (the sternum), then you must reduce that and reset it, which will be easier for your hands to handle and require little extension of effort.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	May it not be extension that is not prepared, and the equipment of the patient are in their hands; thereupon you reduce this which belongs to your own preparation, made from iron with a length of seven digits or eight (a finger'supon roughly equivalent) and a width according to the amount required for treatment. Hence it becomes necessary for the doctor to extract these three or four times as per what is needed in the healing process within all kinds of fracture treatments.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And both receive care and a little pressure for that it does not fold upon them during the operation time.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: It is an acute condition at which its margin appears in the patient'setup areas; and it also concerns the groin of said individual directed towards parts (possible reference to swelling or distension).
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is how it goes:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	E it is named in Greek "Labros Volantis Atelerem," hence, it's a small cushion/pad.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	For that purpose which is paused at his limb goes up on top of the bone'mightily prominent, as if it were standing upright or being raised above its counterpartbone and joint alignment was considered important in medieval medicine for alleviating certain conditions like
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And as soon as it returns to the bone within which a resting period is observed (rest), and its jaw clamps down on any of these devices(like chin straps or other mouth-coverings). This indicates that they believed in applying certain measures, possibly physical therapy techniques such as gentle exercises for
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Therefore you are expected to clamp down on the limbs of a fracture between them (presumably by two people or as part of an apparatus), and if that bone is not severely broken, do so using good technique; but when it comes to inscribing/impressing this healing device into that particular piece of his bone where the instrument has power.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	May you not be able to reduce the bones of all that we have reheated, then divide and take away from it what flows at your abode among those inner organs which are in our hands; or hammer down one of them into any form within your reach.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	When that which is hardness in the bone and sharp small pieces are applied, then do so accordingly (to treat it).
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone is reduced (set in place), and with it being set, you experience intense pain penetrating deeply into your body; thus when you confer care to the swolthy area, do so greatly.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration is complete and you submerge the cloth in wet, dark water (and if it's summer), do not place it on dirt or any other cause where there might be oil that could lead to a fall and breakage.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Apply salts in the hour of meat restoration, and lay down what was discovered as dislocations and use coverings according to their quantity.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: With all caution not to strain the child at risk of a fracture, for doctors often happen upon injuries or illness that deteriorates bone or joint health, making it harmful.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If it is a looseness of the sinews that does not match the tightness of other bone fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the child is large or ill (meaning small for their age and sick), where they have bad accidents that cause pain in those areas, do not stop to rest on these chairs; perhaps it'dict healing when covered with hard blankets at this place of stay, holding them.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When once or twice a day it begins to generate phlegm in the patient, which has been resting on your cloth that you have placed above them (the bed), then provide medication with these pills and ointments according to our custom for treating colds; when applying such treatments along with liniments.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	Even as you consider the patient' extraneous matter each day during morning and evening while it is consolidated and secured, make sure that their limb has been prepared in such manner so that bleeding can flow from there to the parts easily when needed.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the child passes motions for days and neither is solidified nor cut off from it below (the belly), then you know that there are small movements inside, which allows you to inquire further into the matter of the sickness within them.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	From those satagias (likely referring to foul or harmful substances) that have been separated and extracted from the body, those which are not removed and placed back into limbs causing pain; insert them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If you have pain in the joints or hips due to decay and decomposition, it is called arthritis (or another type of deterioration), so be aware; this has been previously narrated at your healing place concerning its treatment as described earlier herein.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xx.	Based on your description of various phrases that suggest elements from Latin
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	The phrase in question pertains to the treatment or care for a joint affected by injury, specifically referring to "the bone ends" (possibly implying areas of broken bones near joints) within any given fracture site on
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	In this line of medieval medical treatise:
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	And consider if the bandaging is recent and apply those medicines that have fastened it to these: beeswax or ointment paste, liniment oil, amulets (or charms), herbs, binding them all together; then wrap this around the wound with stiff padding made of fabric like cloth or felt, tightly bind and secure each one firmly.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the joint is already turned into stone and tightened up due to overuse, then divide that part used for walking with a sharp tool where there's excess material or protruding parts, remove all such surplus matter inside it, keeping everything within so as not to allow what should be removed out again. Take care of the treated area until healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol .xxi. (The exact meaning of this line is unclear
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	When the bone healing after a fracture has been restored and according to Roman tradition, delicately but gently treat the limb again following its natural course.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is healed, and thus the subtle and fragile parts of the body are returned to their place: for these pains occur not due to movements but rather because causes such as excessive tension in ligaments or joints (where nutrition cannot freely circulate), or an abundance of entrails; or sudden jerky motions that do not align with its natural time, or dyspnea from the chest area and purgation.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	Care for the humors involves draining and softening the malady'thy body, administering baths, and applying poultices and liniments to it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Apply pressure on the limb so that the poultice draws nourishment into it and returns it to its natural shape while providing sustenance for growth or healing.
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol .xxii.: This line does not appear to contain any medical
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Care of the fractured bones when they are set immobile, and forbidding their operation here where it is covered (possibly indicating that no further medical intervention should be attempted at this location). Translation line by line:
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When you heal the body of that member already twisted and elevated in bone fracture and knot formation, it may be according to its natural structure; however, this does not prevent receiving the word from someone who exists such a limb now newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	May also stand as witnesses among doctors and restaurant staff, who have performed this operation which is considered lost due to great fear for the one whose death it caused.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	May joint and knotting be recent, then if they are bound in the water basin where your knees rest (the space filled with soothing herbs like chamomile and dill), apply them as baths along with honey for healing; or use a poultice of crushed plantain leaves/flaxseed paste mixed with olive oil, applying it to the affected area. Alternatively, if they are fatty drugs that have been ground into powdered form and applied between one's breasts (as in preparations for convalescence), accompany them as medicinal comforters; or apply grated fats from colostrum along with linseed poultice to the same area.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Some joints are dissolved by persistent heat from the feverish furnace and should have movement in all parts of the body throughout the entire day.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	May it be so that in the future and become fortified and converted into stone, which will then necessitate care with iron tools to cut out the downward displaced part of this patient' extruded bowels (meaning a perforated or ruptured abdomen), as well as excess fluid from the connections of that particular surgeon, poured under these delicate bones.
Capitol .xxiii.	Based on my understanding of Latin-influenced languages like Italian, Spanish
De sermo en dislocacio.	Considering the blend of linguistic elements from Romance and potentially older medical terminologies a
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	In dislocation is an injury to any of the joints where it causes immobility; as a result, pain and large injuries occur in the humoral excesses (referring back to "humours" from medieval medical theory). It demands immediate attention or intervention for recovery. This sentence suggests that when ligaments are disrupted at a joint causing limited movement ("immobilized"), it results not only in significant distress due to built-up internal fluids but also potentially serious injuries, urging the need for prompt care and treatment according to ancient medical practices
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Consequently when a joint becomes displaced or dislocated, it is urgently necessary to perform an attempt at reduction; delaying this action may lead not only to the site being locked in position but also significantly increase difficulty for later attempts of reducing (or realigning) such injuries. This sentence emphasizes immediate treatment upon discovering a joint displacement and highlights potential complications arising from procrastination, which could make future reduction procedures more challenging according to medieval medical theory.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And so that there is not gout or bandaging at the time of setting in place (apothecem), often these movements bring on cramps and pains to be dealt with.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When the fluid becomes acidic, then cover yourself with flaxseed preparation for recovery from putrefaction and place your limb in water made of goat'dictum and oil, also reduce it to ease movement.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	Every part of it will be cured by the water from which its memory returns there (to that place).
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And when the displacement occurs as follows after a fracture, from where the bone was broken in goes into where it has been thrown again:
Capitol .xxiiii.	The provided text is already translated into English with some medieval medical terminology retained in Latin-
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the treatment of jaw dislocation nowhere to translate as it's not a complete sentence or phrase and seems like an isolated term possibly referring back to previous context
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	 Dislocated jaws if not treated; and dislocation of the jaw is considered according to one of two methods: either they are simply reduced by a slight removal from their places (presumably through gentle manipulation), or in cases where there's been an entire displacement, after which it should be mollified at the joint. Meanwhile saliva flowing outward near the mouth cannot maintain its position nor can the patient close their lips; and the tongue is wrapped around one’seahorse as for a sail (an expression indicating complete immobility or wrapping in this context).
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the detachment of it is little, then back in its major positions returns by itself a little.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	May it be that if the dislocation is complete and finished, then apply prompt reduction of its alignment, without delay for all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If the reduction is difficult and mainly if both jaws are dislocated, apply a poultice of waterfall tail oil or wine inside where it must be done to ease the reduction, so that once applied on both sides, complete the reduction as soon as possible according to what has been said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they return with their mouths closed and the malady' extruded without being soothed by drape cloth or wax, apply oil and honey on those pus particles therein; this softens his sinews in a gentle manner.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And if it is to be administered easily, and not work on the mouth's opening where food enters and drink flows in until the jawbone has been numbed and healed inside.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	If the reduction of two dislocated jaws is difficult at any time and cannot be adjusted during appointments, regular fevers persist, and forcefully you must rub the abdomen of malady (implying a hernia), and also frequently cholera becomes pure.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	When you take it again, then you know that I have lost it; and move according to the one wherein I took this medicine within X days.
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol .xxv. (The ".xxv." part likely indicates
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of the shoulder dislocation and the muscle limb extension.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The fur finally is not dislocated from the leg by its continued motion; and occasionally it becomes dislocated at the extremity, which is declared in feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The restoration of him is that the malady ascends upon his two legs and extends their bands.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Return (or apply) pressure at that location with your hand or firmly press it back on yourself; she/he will return there again.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Return your hand above that plaster and powdered it tightly.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	May the extremity of that which has been shoved into and remains at its place, is not dislocated on any day; but if it becomes reduced and need to be repositioned as per what we have said and according to your apparatus.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Return the pressure on that bandage, and powder, and extraction; command the humors to settle down and return into their cavity while healing occurs.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	At this moment of care in the physician's skill, the extent of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	The provided text seems like an excerpt from medieval medical literature that blends
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	From the reduction of a muscle dislocation." This line suggests instructions or observations regarding how to address and treat a situation wherein a person's mus
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You know that the muscle is not dislocated but in three ways: one of which it becomes dislocated when touched suddenly from above or below." This sentence explains there are different states for how a muscle can be affected, highlighting sudden contact as an action leading to possible injury. The line indicates knowledge about distinct responses of muscle displacement and suggests that this type of movement—touching the muscle rapidly from either side (above/below)—can cause dislocation if already
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	The second is that it becomes dislocated away from the muscle, and this type of injury cannot occur at joints behind (posterior to) or in front due to nerves." Here, an additional method for how a muscle can become dislocated without involving adjacent parts like bones or nervous connections is described. The explanation clarifies that specific types of movement—away from the main body structure and through neural pathways—are not typical means by which such injuries arise according to medieval medical understanding. This statement further refines what conditions do (or don't) lead to muscle dislocations based
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	Mostly it becomes detached and comes out of the joints when touched suddenly below or above the sinews (the connective tissues), especially in those parts where bones are thin; sometimes even from well-connected muscles, as these come apart with difficulty." This line provides insight into common scenarios under which a dislocation might occur—through sudden movements affecting areas of less robust structural integrity like thinned joints or sinews. It also notes that detachment can happen more readily in parts where the bones are thinly layered and may be present even when muscles, normally strong connectors between structures, exhibit signs of dislocation due to significant stress—which align with medieval notions on how injuries manifest based upon structural vulnerabilities. This
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And when cold vinegar is applied to the head for palpation or tightening (percussion/cavitation), and their limb muscles are set with an astringent poultice, they massage it where already displaced.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Now that you exhale where you are overly seated, and at this time proceed with the treatment of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is a displacement of the joint or limbs and you must apply touch treatment without fear (implying not causing harm).
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	From this displacement it is felt that there will be light reduction when cold and inflammation descends into the malady.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	E the reduction of him is for lifting his body parts up above them and placing their pillows gently there just below it so that he can strengthen those joints again, with whom the servant elevates his body part by extension; and after a while returns leggedly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	May if for that water returns not and because there occurs dislocation over days; the swelling of the limb must be immersed in tailwater (likely referring to a specific type of bath), treated with broth made from linseed, fenugreek, honey, and cumin—all administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Elevate the hips so they are resting on their two and place them gently with pillows as pauses await wool between rising and constriction, then have the midwife pause the foot of the patient, lifting up the head of the muscle at its vertex, pulling the covering of the hip to prevent swelling quickly in those parts, another attendant holds onto the hips' heads - this way they won’t become inflamed suddenly.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	If you wish to reduce this condition further: and make present before it a long home that is from there above his waistline (above the abdomen), and insert quickly its muscle into the distension of the belly, immediately drawing out the mass inside right away while another servant removes it through the patient's stomach.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	May if the thigh is swolthy (thickened), then where there comes another cause that holds it upwardly suspended, such that when it returns or displaces back again, here begins to worsen significantly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And another method of reduction involves placing a long staff with its head resting on mortar like bristle, which is neither thick nor subtle; position it over the waist where the staff drape lies, let the malady sit there for as long as possible along the length of the stick. Lay hands upon each part in turn and extend them so that flesh from another body region comes to strengthen this area; when doing so quickly returns joints (ligaments) back to their natural place swiftly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	If it is difficult to reduce the body for all reasons mentioned above, then use this treatment as follows: grasp a staff with the length of which extends up to two cubits and hold that stick at an arm's length from you; shape its thickness according to the part specified in these instructions hereinabove.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	E place it back over the head with lions' garments, ensuring that their hat does not touch the waistband (of the patient).
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Here the stone is placed timely in the groin area and both arm over shoulder with sword into the divisions of time quickly; hold the sword on attendants, arms, and hand's extension.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Here the arm is placed on a scale in accordance with latitude, and the hand extended to all parts immediately below it; another servant hangs from the other side at that joint inside now.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	When the internal substance of the body is completed according to any possible way available to you, and after taking pauses for your sponge soaked in wool lint or alum paste made up entirely over all muscle layers; apply pressure bandages prepared with powdered molybdenum salt and white chalk on the entire muscle mass. This allows it to turn upside down, as well applying quick pauses for your sponge at stricture points tightly holding hands; fixate the arm'se bandage around the patient’s shoulder bone securely, making sure that there is no discharge of mucus from their mouth over seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	When food of the malady is sparingly taken and thus rests for their body part, then healing sets in upon it.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And if it is provided with more substantial food and engages in some form of motion, then already fixed or not soothed will also heal.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to moisture that you have caused it or for another reason, then in that case administer cautions with three tools as described in the book of cautions.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	If all this pain is present and the ligament and joint are not fixed for seven days, then the bandage and strapping will reduce these over some times, and it won't be closed nor can that arm raise to the parts above, so you know that their nerves which belong to the muscle head or extensions/softening, this joint has never been stuck in place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet: it's customarily called gout (medical condition) by doctors;
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And when it is administered in that other constriction, care for it until healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	If you apply pressure to the body'dictio (gravity imbalance) in the limb and delay its movement, then have the humoral excess washed away until it returns to the patient's original state of nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	The given text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discussing
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Regarding the treatment of spinal subluxation (a slight misalignment or partial displacement). Here is a possible translation line
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Understand that the spinal column is difficult and resembles it; this dislocation occurs throughout all parts, mainly at the part above below (referring possibly to thoracic vertebrae), which are not immediately addressed by sudden actions or touches according to any particular figure where a dislocation has occurred – when you adjust an already misaligned spine, that is evident and here it arched outward such that your arm cannot bend at the elbow joint nor can you grasp whatsos muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	When you have the hips locked together and reduce their dislocation as much as possible right now so that they can be cured by a tight splint; if there is an immobile fracture, it's difficult to restore completely, especially when it happens at the joints behind them, for then all other species of displacement cause greater pain and movements will hasten their death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	When the restoration is possible for him/her, it means that his/her body should be extended with hands and arms outstretched, and their caregiver(s) are on their hips and legs holding their hands or pressing into the palm of their hand to return (or straighten) them back to position.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation occurs in parts ahead of time, return it to its place by bending your hand into its position until you hear a click on the joint near their palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	If dislocation does not submit to reduction, then apply vigorous extension and strong movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	When two ministers stretch out their arms, they hold that instrument with them so it does not get extended too much.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And have they turned their arms completely over it all, wrapping the long drape or lariat around the person's body, holding them.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	When the doctor touches the joint, apply some oil to it so that this is what helps with its lubrication; and strengthen the joint by means of vigorous massage until it returns to normal function.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Here comes the line to translate: For the reduction of it that has been paused on that paste in which its stiffness and exudation are from bile under pressure within narrowed bowel passages, with the arm suspended by the collarbone and laid down for a few days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Return it is placed back; and therefore if the joint formation occurs at that place, then you should pull out its ligament and fixate that area.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If you see the joint not strained, then apply the plaster and bandage, leaving it in place for several days until extracted; afterwards return that as well.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If you apply gravity to the reduction of the joint, and its position is in motion, then administer moisture soaked with cold (and possibly some warmth) gently; or pause over the joint where it's a fatty hernia, bind it tightly, and place that upon the bones during day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Return that one (the affected body part), and wash/bathe the joint with water; when moisture appears on the spot due to movement, repeatedly rub it here, day after day for the first course of treatment, and continue likewise for courses two and three.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Am inserted in that bath wherein it enters (the patient).
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	If you wish to pause over that damp and split wound at the edge of water, press upon it some times, then that very same will become dry and return to its proper disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii. (This line appears to be referencing a Roman numer
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	From the care of displacement fractures, it is at the joint between the arm and the body where this occurs. (Breaking down each Latin-influenced phrase for clarity in English)
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	When some of the masses are displaced and reduction (setting back into place) is difficult for them, it's contrary to other joints; however if there'supreem haste in placing that mass during its dislocation, so that a point or apomedication occurs at the location being set,
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of the dislocation is that you stop the joint between the thigh and buttock on a table, and have the attendant extend this part away from it; then let the doctor or palm press upon the impending joint intersection until it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	Mays empero cover that which is considered to be in the palm on the belly of her, then place it between her two sides over a beam for extension and reduction; if she has dislocated previously must position her body as such intrinsically upon the beam so that the doctor'sin hand rests above this imminent joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns soon, all is well; but if not, that part will harden and become an ulcer therein, and you cannot perform its reduction until the days have passed by.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	May the joint according to its twisted nature; and there is no cause in the belly, but it softens itself without any cause, so you understand that the nerves are knotted or spasmed, and at this point not only should your strength be used for proper care of the limb with caution tools (cautery), but also to provide good water which fortifies its purpose.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	So when one becomes restless after returning (perhaps from a medical treatment or bedridden state), place the recommended dressing on them, and bind tightly for days; furthermore, cut off their stockings and exercise those areas again.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	May it be that if the patient' extraneous movement is still present and they experience some heaviness in their limbs or joints, apply warm water to these areas until relieved (allowing for adjustment).
Capitol .xxix.	The text provided is written in an archaic style of medical Latin-infl
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the treatment for displacement." This line suggests a discussion or instructions regarding therapeutic approaches to address issues related to b
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some movements have led to dislocation of the joints throughout the body." Here, it appears that certain actions or perhaps improper practices are causing joint dislocations in various parts of the individual
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	When a joint of those in the hands or abdomen is dislocated, I will pull it and cause its return to these places within wherein lies pain." This line indicates that when an individual's hand or abdominal (belly) joint becomes dislocated—a condition they are diagnosing as causing suffering at specific locations ("places of pain") inside the body. They then proceed with a treatment by pulling, presumably through some form of manual therapy like manipulation to realign and return what is called "dislocation" back to where it
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Support the head of the body and suspend what is needed from which there was already a dislocation, leaving it for two days." Here they are advising that in treating certain types of joint or spinal issues ("dislocations"), one should provide support to stabilize the patient's neck (head) while also supporting any affected parts causing pain and immobilizing them
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Support that part, extend it within which daytime is spent." This line provides further instructions on handling the affected area or parts during treatment when patients are awake and active ("day"). It suggests a specific approach to managing these issues while considering daily activities: resting certain body sections
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	When night comes, support that part while recounting the story of it and not allowing for its dislocation during daytime or engaging in movement with it at night time." This passage gives guidance on how to manage a possibly vulnerable body area after dark ("night"), emphasizing restraint from further injury by avoidance of certain movements. It seems they are counseling caretakers about the timing and activities conduciency for such areas, advocating caution during specific hours (day/night) while suggesting that some activity may be permitted but with careful consideration to prevent worsening or re-dislocation ("lock"). This
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	When it seems like water (a symptom of excess fluid or imbalance in the body), and if it is dislocated inside the belly (possibly referring to an organ being displaced within the abdominal cavity due to some condition), then perform the first operation, which involves manipulating this element into its proper place, with the hope that it will heal.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	When something resembling water appears when it is displaced in other parts of the body.
Capitol .xxx.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any textual
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	The translation for this line appears to be a medical concept in Latin, potentially related to the treatment of vertebral displacement (spondylolisthesis). The English
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When any of the vertebrae in the back or neck is fully dislocated and fragments have shifted to other locations, it cannot be cured here; instead, death approaches due to spinal damage (spondylolisthesis). Here lies a grave situation where immediate medical attention could potentially save life by addressing severe spine-related injuries.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	So then it is swolthy at the back parts and there's no yellow discharge.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	May the cure for them be considered if there is a yellowed humoral acidity of youth, which in neither curing nor healing it at all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	May return to those who practice curative speech in depth, which they may come back from; already have opened the space between them where their pus escapes, for better understanding of my current condition, through which I express and ease it using various tools provided by him/her.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	When you touch the wet humidity that is on one'thy side in your chest, it is neither healing nor recovery from there for what happens to both of them; and seemingly so within this condition as well.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	From those is not healed except for that which you apply directly there, as much water they recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	It is that the swelling extends over the patient'se face below their chin and is spread quickly with moisture to prevent it from being visible on the skin.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister holds the staff, and it is not fixed in a pit; another minister holds that form as well.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Here comes the full translation:
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Here is the line-by-line translation:
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The doctor places their hands on the spinal column that is strong within it and adjusts their own weight upon this one tablet, making sure to position themselves accordingly so they can return properly.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If it does not return through this method, take a table of which the length or width is three feet, and carve into the wall where we previously stated that the womb should be placed in between its extreme limits within the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	If you wish to lift the one that has been turned upside down (presumably a patient or body part being treated), stay on your feet and keep your head at the bottom of the two sticks; each stick is as long as an arm, place the top of your head between them near the end of the legs' handles; there should be about one palm space in length between any two sticks, and it has already become twisted (likely a hernia or similar condition) within which movement occurs with hands held firmly on earth to prevent further displacement.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And take a staff in which he turns and rotates between the two sticks of each pair.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	In the limb there is a structure in which it forms wood, whose length is as much water that has been turned over; and in the other two structures, they seem like that one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Return the ligaments you have stretched in the groin area where it is necessary for your leg to stand up straight (and bear weight), and those that are strained in the hips, which must support their legs when they walk upright.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And for each turn and position you must have one person holding it at the back of their body as directed by us (the doctors).
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is how it goes: (The phrase describes or outlines a specific methodology/techni
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And I placed it back in position and secured the location with glue from an album of leaves; also applying padding over the screwed-in wooden table frame where three or more inches are needed to fill up this space occupied by the vertebra, its length being as much as required to press out any signs of swelling at the site of inflammation on the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	Return its ligaments as we have mentioned before and place the humors (nutritive fluids) inside to ensure healing.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If there is any likelihood of healing at the end of recovery, then take medicines that moisten and cleanse for a long time in administration through the table (likely referring to treatment), which we have recommended; and these are already being administered at this location with iron plates.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And some signs indicate an impending crisis in the lower vertebrae of the spine; it is this one from which you have already noticed its proximity, and without intervention at this time with our medicine, it will lead you towards death.
Capitol .xxxi.	From what is provided in your text snippets and considering elements of Latin ("Qu
De curacio de anca dislocada.	The phrase "Curacio de anca dislocata" when translated into English suggests a focus on the
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	The translation of this line indicates that: "Knowing well enough the joints around the hip and muscle do not dislocate so much alone, nor to those waters (or fluids) which you may injure other smaller body parts with cavities or concavity." This passage seems rooted in a medieval understanding of medicine where bodily movements are thought to affect various areas. The text discusses the importance of recognizing when dislocations occur specifically around hips and muscles, as opposed to causing harm elsewhere within more delicate structures like body parts with cavities or concavity shapes (which could refer to joints).
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The line translates to: "Accordingly, the hip joint is dislocated in four ways; it may be dislocated at the divisions of muscles or on their partitions, above (ante), below (posterior and anterior-inferior positions that are not as commonly referred to with these terms today), forward (anterior) direction movements causing a misalignment." This description provides insight into medieval medical theories regarding how joint dislocations could occur. The specific articulation of four potential manners for hip dislocation suggests an attempt by the author or commentator
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	Translated to English: "Mostly it is dislocated at muscle divisions (likely referring to the attachment of tendons or ligaments), and scarcely so in forward movements (ante) or behind (posterior)." Here, there's a focus on typical causes for hip joint issues as perceived by
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	This passage translates to: "The sign of the dislocation in muscle divisions when adjusting the humid bandage on and around it (likely for swelling), you apply long compression, which reduces inflammation from what was healthy beforehand; thus preventing any bending movement at your hip joint with hand gestures. Hereby reaching down to this specific point of contact made by an apostemy cautery—using the thumb and fingers touches it so that the sign indicating dislocation can be observed, wherein if corrective measures are taken promptly (symbolized as arriving here), restoration is possible." The text appears to provide guidance on assessment through physical manipulation of a humid bandage applied near or at an affected joint. It suggests observing signs like inflammation and the potential for dislocation, then proceeds with immediate intervention using hand gestures combined with possibly symbolic healing tools such as cautery (historically used to stop bleeding by searing wounds). The precise use of language indicates a hands-on approach in diagnosing joint issues based on physical signs and applying direct care. This reflective practice is commonplace within the historical contexts where written accounts often blend anec
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The translation of this line from medieval medical treatise is as follows in English:
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	When the patient's dislocated parts expand out from under the cushion secondly accompanying, their pain does not double in that part where it is now located; urine remains within and limping on the foot occurs due to this injury - here you must walk with crutches.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	May reduction of these spices for this dislocation be considered by you as long as the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already been addressed with your current administration in accordance with its arrangement; therefore there will not be any further addition to that treatment course now. And consequently, no prognostication can be made at this point regarding recovery.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	May it be in the one wherein dislocation has occurred recently, and which is among the four types of dislocation, then take your cough back to that place you returned from (the joint), extend it to all body parts downwards as well as upwards, left and right sides. Once done firmly return without seeking help for other treatments.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	May happen if it doesn'thy return in this phase, then the servant you prepared must be strong and extend the cushion under their feet as they push off quickly; another minister should stretch that same medium upward towards them so swiftly with his hands to tickle those extremities. Also apply firm pressure on the sling supporting it beneath the patient's foot while pulling in, then use a thin thread where this force is applied—a servant will hold its ends securely between their fingers; and another minister should delicately handle that slender end of the line to avoid injury at the extremity.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	Where it may be an extension out of the body or from one joint to another between the shoulder and the chest area, or between the lower back joints and hips.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	When all of them are extended within a period until the swelling has risdict and descended to its place on the surface of the ground, that is when the edema subsides.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This particular type of extension is characteristic throughout all four regions.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns due to water we have mentioned, then she must take care of herself with all special waters described for her treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the patient's own reduction, when dislocated and displaced to their joints, so that the hernia is returned onto its chest; and pause the ligaments at the site where between the head of the thigh and the place where it protrudes into extension towards the part below shoulder blade.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Here comes another minister with strong pneumatic force to press the thighs of him/her and extend firmly over all parts downwards; when this returns back to his/her own place (the original position).
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This particular substance is for softening that which this member reduces, and these other substances.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	May it be excused over you and not obey this specific method of healing for all, as long as the two legs of the patient are well joined together by ligaments, bones, thighs, and knees.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	Whenever any part of the body has a length corresponding to four digits and the hernia in the groin may be extended as much as two fingers' lengths,
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And raise the patient'thy hips on the chair's head, and place him or her in such a way that his/her body is upright like May Day (traditionally held on April 25th), wherein the length of their body from the earth equals two fathoms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Command a strong youth who reduces the head of the thigh and has it suspended by another young man; this other young man also lowers the thigh at the command, whereby the joint returns quickly to its place due to strength.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the reduction itself, when it dislocates to the outside part, wherein the hump of the sickness protrudes according to what has been recommended in his abdomen's gelatinous state; and its ligaments are properly placed on the hollowed mass of the illness and over the patient's chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	Each minister extends to his/her own area, and the doctor holds it tightly according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	So if you obey the withdrawal method, it is immediately stopped; but if not, rest on that position carefully and apply warmth to that area as directed in these instructions.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	May the thighs bear upon them what they desire for themselves.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	When dislocation occurs in the parts ahead (nowhere specified), it is then covered that according to this treatment method; and the doctor places his right palm on the hernia, while he presses with his other hand upon that area which has been compressed by the first one, pausing as long as necessary for extension at each part.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is at the joints behind, they do not see that the malady has extended to the parts of today, and it rises above the ground; those who have seen its cause knowingly stop over where a heavy stone rests upon two thick stones, as we said before—therefore there'll be no pain.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	When compression is applied with a table over the location where joint pain occurs.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So when the reduction is completed as instructed, and it's not your task to perform this action (the term for "reduction" in our context isn't specified), you extend cushions from under them; once again, after straightening these bent areas, extending those same cushions, expanding their space outward with bands or straps attached by a belt at the waist, ensuring that the large band does not protrude in any part of the body. Hold it firmly for three days to four:
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Return the ligaments and bandages, and compare one cushion with another.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	And if you see those tools in your handsomely prepared wound, then understand that the dislocation has already been fixed, and so let it proceed with healing underground (or within).
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	If you see any cause of softening, return and bandage that part according to your first dressing method, and apply it again for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And apply that particular one therein, and let it take its time in walking over such periods until comfort is attained.
Capitol .xxxii.	Based on your description of regional dialect influences (Latin, Italian,
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	From care for joint dislocation.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The displacement is threefold according to these manners: it can be dislocated at the parts beyond (outside), and from those inside, both forward and backward—and there'thy shall not again become so displaced hereafter.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation is to command the humors that apply their cushion at the thigh'm, and you understand it has been displaced (dislocated).
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The translation of each line into English is as follows:
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Return that and fix it in the sling at the thighs, applying those as bandages for three or four days, then apply them to him/her again.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	No use the limb of walking for more than a few days until it is healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If your reduction of it is excused from you, then apply forceful extension to the limbs mentioned in its preceding treatment for the hip joint.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any text for translation in
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	From the treatment of a tarsal fracture:
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The heel sometimes becomes inflamed due to slight injury, and the displacement of it is felt in the joints or at the joint surfaces; this pain is called [the dislocated toe].
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	When it is said that the patient'dict (person) has sprained their ankle, it means that they have been displaced from where they were originally positioned/dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	May the cure of this person be easier by gentle release and ensuring that their legs are within so they can return.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	When in the treatment of him as he is dislocated according to complement, make sure you fix his thigh properly and hold that minister (a specific limb or bone) firmly with your hand behind it at its place on this spot here.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And return your right hand to the thigh of the patient'dictor body and bring back your left hand from below the knee in the location of the cushion, holding their hands.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Here applies the pressure on the leg with two hands (left), and for two turns of time/sessions, then extends it outwards while applying force to the chest'thy hand that holds his foot- this helps in proper functioning/movement of intestines held by thy arm.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	When humors are administered according as they have been treated.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Returns the patient'dict chest into its comfortable position; you are at the bedside.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if he returns in one or two weeks after this treatment and his leg is swolthy, then all is well (he has recovered). But if not, repeat the operation until he does return to health.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	May you be prohibited from reducing it at home where we have recommended treatment; if that happens, the abdomen will complain about its position on your two feet over ground soil, and a wooden board firmly fixed in the earth'dictates space between their thighs. You already wrapped them up with a cloth to prevent (them) from showing signs of discomfort/pain.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Here comes the sentence to translate:
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Here comes the medical procedure to translate:
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation is returned and it's declared to you that there has been reduction of him/her, then apply strong binding (bandage) on that joint and fasten his/her limb firmly to the cushion.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	When you fear or protect the nerves located behind the ankle, to prevent them from being violent and leading astray your strength.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Return that for two or three days, and if the ligament softens, extend it further.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Return that item in the day or at night for forty days and prevent you from having 'malignancy' (which refers to a harmful condition).
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	May it not happen that if one goes into this space, the displacement will not be overly messy and corrupted hereinabove, nor receive medical care.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	If you apply a cold application (apestema caut), then take care that the moisture administered is in the place we have described previously for treatment and bandaging, until it becomes warm again.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from medieval medical literature written in a style
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	For the treatment of knee joint displacement.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	When that person who is dislocated has only a little extension of their jaw; and if it'se not difficult to unlock them, then do so without hesitation.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	May it be if the dislocation is in the knee joints of their legs, then cover with bandage or cloth its leg over the pelvic bone on the ground or table where they are lying down and continue to keep them like that as long as they come up.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Here you place your weight on the foot and pause it over what enters from the joints, holding that which goes into so as to return inside where it entered, watching for when that already swolthy limb does not appear in its elevated position anymore.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Return the patient's stomach with a table that blows through it completely; two caps are on it and tighten this structure firmly for three days. Then return/restrain both movements of walking, until he is rested and ready to recover fully.
Capitol .xxxv.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any text for translation as
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	The phrase appears to be discussing the displacements caused by spices that affect either small creatures or humans, possibly related to a broken bone:
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When you have any cause of that, and you pierce through the treatment of it, as well as in its restoration, success is assured death avoidance (success or healing will help prevent an untimely death).
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And so you shall immediately perform reduction in the cause'thy cavity, thereby effecting a fracture setting apotheosis.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And when the limb returns as you drink, administer such regimen that yields purgative and curative effects for what is required by the lubricating ointments applied to it.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	If dislocation occurs and there are injuries to the separated bones, then perform their setting together, thus making them as they were in simple waters that occurred previously at these locations of those people.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	Guard and avoid according to your judgment that which comes from within the body through fear as dictated by my preaching; for this is better for you under your Creator, perhaps even forever in your glory, possibly also maintaining health throughout all of time here.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Ayssi finely polish the lips of Albucasis perfectly, as it is not suitable for God according to his will.
Amen.	The provided medieval medical text is not entirely
